Republic of Cameroon Peace - Work - Fatherland
Far 2016/00! or 12 I 206
Porter penal code
PRESIDENCE OF THE REPUBLIC Y |
eer
Certiree con
has
Parliament has deliberated and adopted, the
President of the Republic promulgates the
law whose content follows:
Title |
Of the application of the penal law
Chapter |
Preliminary arrangements
Article 1.- Content
The penal code includes:
a) The book |, made up of articles 1 to 101;
b) The book Il, made up of articles 102 to 361:
c) the decree relating to the regulatory part of the penal code defining the
Contraventions, articles 362 to 370;
d) Articles 371 and 372 fixing the transitional and final provisions.
Article 1-1.- No exemption
The criminal law imposes itself on everyone.
Article 2

.- General and special application
(1) Rules of international law, as well as duly treaties
promulgated and published, impose on this code, as well as any provision
Criminal.
(2) This book is imposed at any other criminal provision, except
special provision targeting in particular the prohibition of stay and the ban or
the limitation of attenuating circumstances enacted even prior to
the entry into force of this book by law or by a regulatory text
having legislative. This paragraph feedback on October 1, 1966
inclusive.
(3) When the same material is subject to both a general provision
not included in the present book and a special provision, the latter
is only applicable if it has not been otherly arranged.
President of the Republic
Secretariat Gener Al
F3 IF service or legislative acmier. 16 AMT
2
PRESDENCE OF THE REPUB ... RA
Genep + secretariat
Steel service
Copy certified C DM
Chapter II 7 4
Of the application of the penal law

Article 3.- Non retroactivity °
Are not subject to criminal law, the facts committed prior to its
entry into force or those who were not tried before its repeal
express or tacit.
Article 4.- less rigorous law
(1) Any new and less rigorous criminal provision applies to
offenses not definitively judged on the day of its entry into force.
(2) If the new layout is more rigorous, the offenses committed
before its entry into force continue to be judged in accordance with the law
old.
Article 5.- New safety measure
Any law enacting a safety measure is applicable to facts not
Definitely judged on the day of its entry into force.
Article 6

.- Abolition of the offense, the penalty or measurement of
safety
Immediately ceases to receive execution, any penalty where measurement of
Safety:
a) Pronounced at the rate of a fact which no longer constitutes an offense;
b) Abolished after condemnation.
Chapter Lil
Of the application of the LO! DIY IN SPACE
Article 7

.- offense committed on the territory
(1) The criminal law of the Republic applies to any fact committed on its
territory.
(2) are included in the territory of the Republic, territorial waters and
the airspace above this territory and these waters, as well as the ships
and aircraft registered in the Republic.
3
However, no member of the crew of a ship where foreign aircraft,
author of an offense committed on board the prejudice of another member of
the crew, even within territorial waters or airspace,
can be judged by the courts of the Republic, unless the help of
The local authority has not been claimed or that public order has not been compromised.
Article 8

.- Partially or totally committed offense abroad
The criminal law of the Republic applies:
a) to any offense, one of the constituent elements to be found
made in whole or in part on its territory;
b) infringements of state security involvement, counterfeiting of
state seal or national currencies taking place there,
committed even abroad.
However, no stranger can be judged by the courts of the
Republic in application of paragraph (B), unless it has been arrested on the
territory of the Republic or that it was extradited to it.
Article 9

.- Boundary, conspiracy, attempt
: tooth subject to the criminal law of the Republic:
Es a) the facts constituting complicity, conspiracy and attempt
Æ fa produced on the territory of the Republic, with a view to committing a
"0% u offense abroad, if this offense is also repressed by
ee the foreign law:
EEE b) The same facts made abroad, in order to commit a
A R = infraction on the territory of the Republic.
$
ARHGEE 10.- offense committed abroad by the citizen or resident
(1) The criminal law of the Republic applies to the facts committed abroad
by a citizen or by a resident, provided that they are punishable by law
the place of their commission and are qualified crimes or offenses by the laws of the
Republic.
However, the sentence incurred may not be greater than that provided for by the
Foreign law.
(2} no citizen or resident guilty of a crime committed against a
particular cannot, however, be judged by the courts of the Republic, in
4
application of this article, that on the prosecution of the public prosecutor seized
of a complaint or an official denunciation to the government of
Republic by the government of the country where the fact was committed.

Article 11.- International offenses
The criminal law of the Republic applies to mercenariat, to the
racial discrimination, piracy, people traffic, in
people, to slavery, to the drug trafficking, to waste trafficking
toxic, capital laundering, cybercrime, corruption and
damage to public fortune committed even outside the territory of the
Republic.
However, no foreigner can be judged on the territory of the
Republic, for the facts referred to in this article committed abroad, that if it has
was arrested on the territory of the Republic and was not extradited, and provided
that the prosecution is initiated by the public prosecutor.
Article 12

.- General jurisdiction of the Jurisdictions of the Republic
Subject to the exceptions provided for in this chapter, the courts
of the Republic are competent to know of all the offenses
to which his criminal law applies.
Presidency
CHAPTER IV SERVICE OR EMER LEGSLAT EL SECIGALINS
OI and EFRARGERES QE PENSE SENSENCES
Article 13.- Exclusion of foreign law
Subject to articles 9 and 10 and this chapter, criminal law
foreign has no effect before the courts of the Republic.
Article 14

.- Foreign sentences
The criminal awards pronounced against anyone, by jurisdictions
foreign, only have effect on the territory of the Republic if:
- the fact is qualified crime or crime of ordinary law by the criminal law of the
Republic:
- the regularity of the decision, its final character and its compliance with
the public order of the Republic are noted by the jurisdiction seized
of a prosecution against the same person or by the courtyard
appeal to the condemned place of residence seized by the ministry
Audience.
5
Article 15

.- Effects of foreign awards
Foreign criminal awards:
- are taken into consideration for recurrence and relegation, for
the granting or revocation of the stay, for the revocation of the liberation
conditional, for rehabilitation and amnesty;
- obstruct any new prosecution for the same facts on the
territory of the Republic, provided that in the event of a conviction,
The penalty has been suffered or prescribed or that grace has been granted.
Article 16

.- Execution of foreign awards
(1) When the awards referred to and noted under the conditions
provided for in article 14 above were pronounced against citizens or
residents and have not been executed in another country, they are enforceable
on the territory of the Republic, unless the condemned one has been released
conditionally, pardoned or amnesty, or that he has prescribed his sentence.
(2) It is up to the jurisdiction seized, under the conditions provided for in the article
14 above to order the execution of this sentence and to pronounce, the case
Based on, security measures that the law of the Republic attaches to said
offenses.
Title he
Senior penalties and measures
Chapter!
Preliminary arrangements
Article 17.- Legality of penalties and offenses
Penalties and measures are fixed by law and are pronounced
that due to the legally planned offenses.
Article 18

.- Main penalties
President of the Republic
The main sorrows are: “Ae
Certified copy
a) For natural persons :,
- The death penalty;
6
- imprisonment:
- The fine.
b) for legal persons -
- a dissolution;
- temporary or permanent closure of the establishment;
- The fine.
Article 18.1. Alternative penalties
AE!
Alternative penalties are:
- General interest work:
- Sanction-repair.
A |
ie
Article 19

.- Accessories sorrows served or acer lega elm
Accessory sentences are - a
a) For natural persons:
- Decreases;
- the publication of the decision;
- closure of the establishment;
- Confiscation,
B} for legal persons:
- the prohibition, for a fixed period, to invest directly
Where indirectly in one or more of the activities provided for by
Its corporate object:
- placement under judicial surveillance for a period
Determined:
- the closure, for a fixed period, of establishments or
Branches used to serve JA Commission of the incriminated facts:
- JA Publication of the decision or its dissemination by means of the media:
~ All other accessories penalties provided for by special texts.
7
President of the Repuslic
Article 20

.- Security measures lena e or ake tea el aegle fa
Certiiee compliant copy
Security measures are: a
a) For natural persons
- The ban on the exercise of the profession:
- relegation;
- Postpenal monitoring and assistance measures;
- internment in a health home;
- Laconfiscation;
B} for legal persons:
- the prohibition to invest in a specific activity for a duration
determined;
- Confiscation;
- placement under judicial supervision for a fixed period.
Article 21

.- Classification of offenses
(1) The offenses are classified in crimes, crimes and tickets according to
the main penalties that sanction them:
- are qualified crimes, the offenses punishable by the death penalty or
a private sentence of freedom, the maximum of which is more than ten
(10) years and a fine when the law has so;
- are qualified crimes, the offenses punishable by a private sentence of
freedom or a fine when the private sentence of freedom incurred
is more than ten (10) days and does not exceed ten (10) years or that
maximum fine is more than twenty cing thousand (25,000) francs;
- are qualified for contraventions, the offenses punishable by a
imprisonment which cannot exceed ten (10) days or a fine
which cannot exceed twenty five thousand (25,000) francs.
(2) The nature of an offense is not modified:
a) When as a result of the admission of an excuse or circumstances
attenuating, the sentence pronounced is that relating to another
category of offenses;
8
b) in the worsening cases provided for in articles 88 and 89 of this
Code.
RCE Dela Republic | Chapter II
See the main penalties
SLAG LEG service or steel and 2:
Certiee Conezsme copy |
Section |
<< The death penalty

Article 22.- Conditions prior to execution
(1) Any death sentence is subject to the president of the
Republic, with a view to the exercise of his grace right.
(2) As long as he was not ruled by the President of the Republic on the
thanks to the sentence, no death sentence can receive execution.
(3) The pregnant woman only undergoes the death penalty after her
childbirth.
(4) No execution can take place on Sundays and holidays.
Article 23

.- Execution
(1) The death sentence is executed by shooting or hanging according to this
which is decided by the judgment bearing condemnation. The execution is public, except
If it is differently decided by the decision to rejection of the appeal in Grace.
(2) The bodies of the tortured are given to their families if they claim them,
It is up to them to have them buried without any device.
(3) The execution report and possibly an official press release
Can only be published in the press.
(4) A decree sets the conditions for applying this article.
Section II
Imprisonment
Article 24.- Implisonment
Imprisonment is a private sentence during which the
condemned is required to work, unless otherwise been decision and motivated by your
jurisdiction.
9
Article 25

.-
(1} The prisoner's work product is affected as follows:
- 1/3 to the Treasury; |
- 2/3 to the constitution of the nest egg.
(2) the methods of application of this article, in particular the conditions
degree management, are set by regulation.
Section III
Fine
Article 25-1.- fine
(1) The fine is a financial penalty under which the condemned,
natural or legal person, pays or makes the public treasury pay a sum
money determined by law.
(2) The maximum fine rate applicable to legal persons is
equal to the fivefold of that planned for natural persons.
(3) When a legal person is guilty of a crime for which alone
An imprisonment is planned, the fine incurred is one million
(1,000,000) to Cing a hundred million (500,000,000) francs.
Section IV
Dissolution
Article 25

-2.- Dissolution
(1) Dissolution is the capital punishment likely to be pronounced against
A legal person.
(2) Dissolution can be pronounced against a legal person
which acted in violation of its corporate object.
(3) The decision pronouncing the dissolution of the legal person includes
the latter's dismissal before the competent court to proceed to his
liquidation, to the diligence of the public prosecutor. oo
Paris l dela republique l
Secretariat Gener Ay
Service du Achier Legislati and € 2> EER AME
Certified copy
10
Section V
Closure of the establishment
Article 25

-3.- Closure of the establishment
The establishment's closing penalty consists in the closure,
temporary or permanent, of an establishment heard in the sense of a person
moral.
This sentence takes the ban, for the legal person in question,
to exercise the activity on the occasion of which the offense was committed.
The duration of the temporary closure cannot exceed five (05) years and the
suspected cannot be pronounced.
Section VI
Alternative sentences
Article 26

.- Work of general interest
(1) Work of general interest is a sentence applicable to liable crimes
imprisonment less than two (02) years or a fine. This
penalty is executed in favor, either a legal person under public law, or
of a legal person under private law responsible for a public service mission,
or still an organization authorized to implement work of interest
general.
(2) The sentence provided for in paragraph 1 above is pronounced by the
jurisdiction of judgment in place of imprisonment or fine, after the
Declaration of guilt and on prior consent of the accused.
(3) the court fixes the duration of the work of general interest, which cannot be
less than two hundred (200) hours or more than two hundred and forty (240)
hours, and the stay cannot be pronounced.
(4) Work of general interest is not remunerated.
(5) The judge's decision provides for the duration of the imprisonment incurred in
case of non -performance of the work penalty of general interest: this penalty
imprisonment cannot be accompanied by a stay.
(6) The list of works of general interest is set by a particular text.
REPUBLIC
{ -
And Ertee Confs €
11
ee

Article 26-1.- Sanction-repair
(1) Sanction-repair is a sentence applicable to liable crimes
imprisonment less than two (02) years or a fine.
It consists in the obligation, for the condemned, to proceed to the
material compensation for damage suffered by the victim within the period and according to
methods set by the competent court.
(2) The sentence provided for in paragraph 1 above is pronounced by the court
judgment in place of imprisonment or fine, after the
Declaration of guilt, and the stay cannot be granted.
(3) The judge's decision provides for the duration of the imprisonment incurred in
case of non-performance of the penalty of _ sanction-repair; This pain
imprisonment cannot be accompanied by a stay.
Article 26-2.- Implementation of alternative penalties
The methods of applying alternative sentences are set by a text
particular.
Article 26

-3.- People excluded from the benefit of alternative sentences
The alternative sentences provided for in articles 26 and 26-1 above are not
not applicable to the authors of infringement of the weapons on arms, of
even as the authors of sexual offenses and the authors of attacks
Body integrity provided for in this code.
Vile section
Provisions common to private freedoms of freedom
Article 27

.- Beginning of the sentence
(1) If the condemned person is not in pre -trial detention or if a
arrest warrant or incarceration is not awarded against him at the hearing,
under the conditions provided for by the code of criminal procedure, the sentence
deprivation of freedom can only be implemented when the conviction
has become final.
(2) If a woman sentenced to a private sentence of freedom is pregnant
or has just given birth, she only undergoes her sentence six (06) weeks after her
childbirth.
Republic?
The mast
Re certiee conf at 2
———
(3) The pregnant woman placed in continuous pre -trial detention, up to
the expiration of the period referred to in paragraph 2 above, to benefit from the
pre -trial detention.
(4) The husband and wife condemned even for different offenses
to a prison sentence lower than one (01) year and not detained during the day
judgment may, at their request, not undergo their sentence simultaneously
If, justifying a certain common home, they are responsible and under their
Keep a child under the age of eighteen (18) years.

Article 28.- Calculation of the sentence
(1) The private sentence of freedom expressed in days is calculated by twenty
Four (24) hours.
(2) The sentence of one month is thirty (30) days.
(3) The sentence expressed in months and years is calculated from date to date.
(4) Subject to the provisions of article 53 of this code, the point
departure of the sentence is fixed:
a) On the day the condemned person is imprisoned in execution of the
condemnation;
b) in the event of confusion of sentences on the day of first incarceration
in execution of one of the convictions.
(5) In the event of an escape, the period during which the convicted
leak is excluded from the calculation of the duration of the sentence.
Article 29.- Separation of minors
Minors of eighteen (18) are undergoing their private sentence of freedom
in special establishments.
Otherwise, they are separated from major prisoners.
AND
Steel Service Legisla Ft Le Eme ®
Copy certified core ™?)
13
Chapter I)
Accessories
Section |
Decheances
Article 30

.- Definition
The forfeiture consists in:
1) Distribution and exclusion of all functions, jobs or offices
public;
2) The inability to be a juror, assessor, expert, juror-expert:
3) The ban on being tutor, curator, subrogated tutor or judicial council,
If not his own children, or a member of a family council:
4) The prohibition to wear any decoration;
5) The ban on serving in the armed forces:
6) The prohibition to hold a school or even to teach in a
instruction establishment and, in general, to occupy
functions relating to education or childcare.
Article 31

.- Application
(1) The condemnation has a perpetual sentence takes the life
Decreshment provided for in article 30 above.
(2) Any other condemnation for crime carries the same forfeiture,
during the sentence, and during the ten (10) years after his
expiration or parole if it has not been revoked.
(3) The competent court may, in all cases provided for in paragraph 2 below
above, by reasoned decision, note the condemned of all or part of these
Decreases and reduce the duration up to two (02) years.
(4) In the event of a condemnation for offense and when the law authorizes them, them
competent jurisdictions may, by reasoned decision, pronounce for a
CING duration (05) years at most, all or part of the forfeiture provided for
Article 30 above.
Presidency of the Republic
Secretamat Genera 7
Service or AOMER LEGISlation Ed 7 *<
COS COS (
14 =
Article 32

.- Deyences and conviction by default
In the event of a default conviction, the forfeiture is incurred to
start from the day of the completion of the advertising measures provided for by the
Code of Criminal Procedure. . President of the Republic
General Secretariat:
Service or Achier Legislatie Er
Copy certified co
IT A Cé section
Other AC penalties
Article 33

.- Publication of the decision
(1) In cases where the competent jurisdiction can order the publication
of its decision, it is displayed under the conditions which are set by
Decree for a period of two (02) monthly in the event of a conviction
for crime or crime, and fifteen (15) days maximum in the event of
ticket.
(2) In the same cases, the competent jurisdiction can also
Order the publication of her decision by media that she indicates.
(3) These publications are made at the expense of the convicted person.
(4) The display can be limited to the decision system.
(5) The provisions provided for in paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 4 above apply
also to legal persons.
7) Information through written press, radio and television or on |
Internet, as well as objective comments, are free.
Article 34

.- Closure of the establishment
In cases where the competent jurisdiction can order the closure of a
commercial or industrial establishment or premises, this measure carries
prohibition, for the condemned or for the third party to which the condemned man sold,
sold or rented the professional establishment or the premises, to exercise in the same
local the same trade, the same industry or the same profession.
Article 34

-1.- Placement under judicial surveillance
(1) The penalty of investment under judicial surveillance is applicable to
criminal legal persons and consists in the designation
of a justice agent whose control mission and duration are
specified by the judgment jurisdiction.
15
(2) The mission provided for in paragraph 1 above can only relate to activity to
The occasion of which the offense was committed.
(3) The agent of justice referred to in paragraph 1 above reports to
Competent parquet, as regularly as necessary, of the accomplishment
of its mission.
(4) At the end of the mission of the justice representative and in view of the report
of this one, the competent prosecution seizes the jurisdiction which pronounced the
placement under judicial surveillance, which points out the legal person of the
placement measure.
Article 35

.- Confiscation of "corpus delicti"
(1) In the event of a condemnation for crime or offense, the competent court
can order the confiscation of all movable property where buildings
belonging to the convicted and seized, when they served as an instrument for
commit the offense or whether they are the product.
(2) In terms of violation, this confiscation cannot be ordered
that in the cases determined by law.
Dance of Repubione Chapter IV.
SCT CREP | untey security measures
Service or ACHER LEGISLATE and 4 °
COPE certified Confo? ;
A Section |
Professional Eviction
Article 36

.- Prohibition of the profession
(1) The prohibition to exercise a profession can be pronounced by decision
motivated against condemned for crime or crime of ordinary law, when it is
noted that the offense committed has a direct relationship with the exercise of
profession and that there are serious fears that this exercise is a
danger of relapse for the condemned.
(2) This prohibition is pronounced for a period which cannot be
less than one (01) year or more than five (05) years, from the day the
pain has been suffered, except in cases where I law has otherwise.
(3) For legal persons, the prohibition referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 below
above corresponds to the prohibition, for a fixed period, to invest
16
directly or indirectly in one or more of the activities provided for by
its corporate object.
(4) in the event of a recurrence under the conditions provided for in paragraph 1 above and
In article 88 of this code, for crime or offense, the prohibition becomes
perpetual.
Section Il
Relevant

Article 37.- Definition of relegation
(1) Relegation is the internment, for a period of five (05) to twenty (20)
years, under a work regime and social rehabilitation during which
relegated are, in the absence of a special establishment, separated from the convicts who
execute their sorrows.
{2} decrees governs the operating conditions of
The establishment, of the labor and social rehabilitation regime of relegated.
Article 38.- Persons excluded from relegation
Cannot be relegated, the condemned who would be less than
Twenty-five (25) years or more than sixty (60) years at the end of the penalty
main.
Article 39

.- Conditions of relegation:
(1) can be relegated, the repeat offender who, in the interval of ten (10) years, no
including penalties suffered and private security measures of freedom, has
Founded, given the conviction pronounced for the new offense!
committed, either:
a) Two (02) convictions to imprisonment for crime or sentence
of death originally commissioned in imprisonment;
b) One of the convictions provided for in paragraph (a) and two (02)
Conditions for more than a year (01) imprisonment;
c) Four (04) convictions for offense to more than one (01) year
imprisonment.
(2) The departure point of the aforementioned ten -year period is the date of
last offense likely to cause relegation.
REPUBLIC
Certiee contort bag 17
- -
(3) The convictions selected for relegation must be final
and each of the facts motivating these convictions must be after the
previous condemnation which has become final.
(4) Ll is taken into account the convictions which have been the subject of Grace,
switching or reduction of sentence.
(5) This is not taken into account of those which have been erased by the
rehabilitation or amnesty.
(6) JL is not taken into account the convictions pronounced against the
Minors aged under eighteen (18) years at the Commission of the facts.
Section III
Post-pilot surveillance and assistance

Article 40.- Definition and duration
(1) Any condemned to a private sentence of freedom greater than a year (01)
may, taking into account the facts of the cause and by reasoned decision, be placed by
the jurisdiction which condemns it and, for a maximum duration of five (05) years,
Under the post-place monitoring and assistance regime including
General obligations and, if necessary, special obligations.
(2) The observation of these obligations by the condemned one is controlled by a
Magistrate appointed for this purpose, assisted by volunteers or paid supervisors.
However, this control is exercised by the police authorities when it comes to
of an individual sentenced for crime or a repeat offender convicted of offense.
(3) A decree determines the conditions of application of this article.
Article 41

.- General obligations
General obligations which are automatically imposed on the convicted
The following:
1. Establish your home in a determined place;
2. Reply to the summons of the authority responsible for the mission of
surveillance and assistance;
3. Receive the supervisor's visits and communicate the
information or documents likely to allow control of
its livelihoods; ER MR
Srcretariai Gener
Service that acher legislanf ehhec er ame
8 Come Certiree Confos.e
ee
4. Inform the supervisor or justify with him the reasons for his
job or residence changes;:
5. Notify the supervisor from any absence exceeding fifteen (15) days and
notify him of his return; .
6. Obtain prior authorization from the authority responsible for this mission
above all travel abroad.
Article 42

.- Special obligations
In addition to the general obligations imposed by article 41 above, the
jurisdiction may impose on the convicted of all or part of the following obligations:
1. Establish your residence in one or more determined places;
2. Do not appear in certain determined places, without authorization
special and temporary;
3. Exercise a professional activity, follow a teaching or
Receive professional training:
4. Submit to control, treatment or care measures,
even under the hospitalization regime, especially for the purpose of
detoxification;
S. contribute to family expenses or regularly pay the
food pensions;
6. Repair the damage caused by the offense:
7. Do not drive certain vehicles determined by the categories of
permit in force;
8. Do not frequent certain places such as drinking flows,
racing fields, game houses;
9. Do not hire Paris;
10. Refrain from all excess of alcoholic beverages;
11. Do not attend certain convicts, including co -authors or
Inves of the offense:
12. refrain from receiving or hosting some at home
people.
President of A
Service of the ao ec o o a l,
——_—_—_————
19
Section IV
From internment to a health house

Article 43.- mental patient
(1) In the event of a acquittal for dementia of the author of a crime or
crime punishable by a prison sentence of at least two (02) years, and
When the freedom of the accused is recognized dangerous for public order by the
jurisdiction seized, it orders its internment in a special house of
health.
(2) This jurisdiction alone can end the internment, after advice of
the competent medical authority attesting that the freedom of the internee presents
No more danger for public order.
Article 44

.- mental infirmity
(1) When an alcoholic, drug addict or affected infirmity
mental is condemned for crime or crime punishable by a sentence
imprisonment of at least two (02) years, in relation to its habits
or its mental state, and that its freedom is recognized dangerous for the order
public, the jurisdiction seized can order its internment in a house
special health special.
(2) internment cannot exceed two (02) years for the treatment of a
alcoholic or drug addict and five (05) years for the treatment of a tiny
mental.
(3) This jurisdiction may shorten the period it had set, after advice from
the competent medical authority attesting that the freedom of the internee presents
No more danger for public order.
Republic
V nes section
DE LA Confiscatio OPIE certifierConform |
Article 45

.- Confiscation =-
Things including manufacturing, detention, sale or use are illicit
are confiscated even if they do not belong to the condemned or that the
prosecution was not followed by conviction.
20
Bag of Aichier Legaslate EF AES. soul
Cextified COMENT
Chapter V A
Of the e gement pr
Article 46.- Conditions.
(1) It can be imposed by the president of the court on anyone who,
by conduct, manifests his unrevited intention to commit a
offense likely to disturb public peace, to engage
Personally and, if necessary, with solvent guarantors, to pay the
Sum fixed if it commits an offense of this nature during the period
determined.
(2) The sum is fixed according to the possibilities of the engaged.
Article 47.- Duration
This commitment can be imposed for a period of one (01) years that can
be brought to three (03) years when it is a usual offender.
Article 48

.- Commitment of parents or tutor
In case the eighteen minor (18) years has committed qualified facts
infringement, the president of the court may impose on his father, mother, tutor or
customary accounts, the commitment provided for in article 46 above for the case
where the minor would commit facts of the same kind within the period of one (01) year
Without the committed reporting that he has taken all useful measures for
The minor does not commit the offense.
Article 49.- Refusal of commitment
(1) Anyone who has not submitted to the commitment to him
imposed or which has not provided the required guarantors, may be immediately
incarcerated until its acceptance or to the designation of the guarantor (s),
Without the duration of this measure being exceeding the duration of the period
planned in the commitment.
(2) Except in the case provided for in article 48 above, the special obligations
referred to in article 42 (1) and (2) above may replace incarceration.
Article 50

.- Inobservation
(1) If the commitment has not been respected, the jurisdiction seized of the offense
orders, in the event of a conviction, the payment of the amount fixed, without
damage to penalties relating to the offense.
2 |
|
(2) With regard to the committed, this sum is recovered by the same
means that the fine and with regard to the guarantor (s) by any civil route.
Chapter Presidency of the Republic
Non-cumulation of the penalties and legslat egleme
Certified copy
Article 51

.- Non-cumul-
_ Ent
(1) In case an individual is the subject of the same prosecution for
Several crimes or crimes or related contraventions, the penalty
rigorous is only pronounced.
(2) In case an individual is the subject of several convictions for
crimes or offenses resulting from various prosecution, the confusion of sentences
Main can be ordered by the jurisdiction seized of the last proceedings.
In the event of cumulation, all the pronounced sentences cannot exceed the
maximum sentence incurred for the most serious offense.
(3) When a main sentence is the subject of a graceful discount, it is necessary
to take into account, for the accumulation of sentences, the sentence commissioned and not of the
sentence pronounced.
(4) The non-cumulation rule does not apply to two (02)
convictions the first had become final before the committee
Facts that motivated the second.
(5) In terms of ticket, the penalties are always accumulated, unless
The court decides otherwise.
(6) In the event of conviction of several offenses, sorrows other than
main sentences, as well as safety measures are accumulated, except decision
contrary to the jurisdiction seized.

Article 52.- Order of execution
(1) Private freedom penalties run in chronological order
of the notification of detention securities to the convicted person.
(2) accessory sorrows as well as the internment provided for in article 43 below
above are immediately applicable, while the other measures of
safety is from the expiration of the main sentence or its suspension.
(3) When several sürete measures must be carried out
cumulatively, their order of execution is as follows:
22
a) internment in a health center; re pore
. legislative and regulation 4 re
b) Relegation: ESP compliant
c) Post-place measures. A A
(4) If, during the execution of one of these measures, the condemned faces
For another crime or crime a private sentence of freedom, the execution of the
safety measure is suspended and the new penalty is first suffered.
Article 53

.- Pre-trial detention
(1) In the event of pre-trial detention, the duration of this is fully
deducted from the private sentence pronounced.
(2) When there has been pre -trial detention and the sentence pronounced is a
fine, the jurisdiction seized may exempt the convicted payment from all or
part of the fine.
Chapter VII
Causes that obstruct the execution of sentences
SECTION!
Simple stay
Article 54

.- Conditions of application and effects
(1) In the event of a condemnation for crime or offense to a sentence
imprisonment less than or equal to five (05) years or a fine, except
in the case provided for in article 92 (2) below and if the condemned
the subject of previous conviction and not deleted to imprisonment, the
jurisdiction seized may order, unless otherwise provided for in the law, that it is
suspended on the execution of the main sentence for a period of three (03) to five
(05) years.
(2) The stay has no effect on accessory sorrows and the measurements
resulting from condemnation.
(3) if during the period thus fixed, cash from the day when judgment or judgment
has become final, the condemned person commits another crime or offense followed by a
condemnation to imprisonment not accompanied by probation, the sentence
suspended is executed in priority and without confusion with the second sentence.
(4) In the opposite case, the expiration of the time produces the effects of
Rehabilitation provided for in article 676 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
23
Section Il
Unscreen with probation

Article 55.- Conditions of application
(1) Logging can be pronounced under the same conditions
that the suspended single, when the sentence is equal to or greater than six (06) months
imprisonment.
(2) It can also be granted to convicted individuals
prior to a prison sentence with simple stay or
a suspended sentence without simple or a penalty
imprisonment without suspected less than six (06) months.
(3) The test period cannot be less than three (03) years nor
greater than five (05) years.
(4) Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article,
Article 54 above is applicable to the stay with probation.
Article 56

.- The probation regime
(1) The probation regime includes general obligations and the case
Based on, special, surveillance and assistance.
(2) The observation of these obligations by the condemned one is controlled by a
magistrate appointed for this purpose, assisted by probation delegates, volunteers or
Removed.
(3) The designation of the delegate for probation is made by the magistrate
responsible for control, which can modify it.
(4) The magistrate of the residence of the condemned control may, to
any moment and by reasoned decision, suspend all or part of the obligations
special or modify them without worsening.
Article 57.- General obligations
The general obligations imposed by article 41 of this code on
condemned, with regard to the supervisor, are automatically imposed on the condemned
placed under the probation regime with regard to the delegate for probation.
President of the Republic has
General Secretariat
Service of the Mchier Legislath and Regusgoent me
Certified copy = me
24

Article 58.- Special obligations
In addition to the general obligations imposed by article 57 above, the
judgment or judgment may impose on the sentence, with probation, the observation of
all or part of the obligations referred to in article 42 of this code.
Article 59.- Obligations of the delegate
(1) The probation delegate must ensure that the convicted person respects the
General and special obligations to which it is subject. It is also
required to arouse and assist the efforts of the condemned person with a view to his
social reclassification, in particular with regard to its family rehabilitation and
professional.
(2) He is required to give him all his moral aid and, in case the
condemned would need material aid, it is up to him to refer to the
magistrate designated so that a help can be brought to him by any organization
assistance or social assistance.
(3) He must regularly keep this magistrate of the exercise of his
mission and refer it to it in the event of difficulties.

Article 60.- Violation of obligations
(1) In case, during the test period, the condemned person does not respect
one of the general or special obligations of his probation, the jurisdiction that has
pronounced the conviction may order the execution of the suspended sentence.
(2) The execution of this sentence does not result in the revocation of a stay
simple previously granted.
(3) If the stay has not been revoked in application of this article or
Article 54 above, the expiration of the time produced the effects of article 676 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure. Eoe la Rpubloue
LLL ENE section
Onr or me condial release
Article 61

.- Definition
(1) Conditional release is the early release of the
sentenced to a private sentence, or submitted, by the decision to
condemnation, to a measure of security of the same kind. It is granted and
Revived by decree.
25
(2) A decree sets the general conditions and the terms of granting and
the revocation of parole.
(3) The sentenced release of the condemned person, if she has not been revoked,
becomes final at the expiration of the duration of the sentence.
Article 62.- Suspension of measures
(1) The conditional release decree may postpone the execution of
internment measures in a special health, relegation,
post-film monitoring and assistance or ban on the exercise of a
profession, which follow the main pain.
(2} This suspension becomes final five (05) years after the expiration of
The main sentence.
Article 63

.- Deadline for granting
(1) Conditional release cannot be granted to the convicted
after the accomplishment of half of his sentence or half of
all sentences in the event of cumulation, given, if necessary,
Grace measurements. It can only be granted to the recurrence after after
the accomplishment of two thirds of his sentence.
| (2) Conditional release can only be granted to the relegated after after
Five (05) years. PR E OF THE REPUBLIC
General Secretariat
$ Legaslative file and regle Nent = TT
Article 64.- Revocation Jy Topie certified as compliant
(1) Conditional release of
condemnation for crime or offense committed later or non -compliance
General or special conditions of liberation.
(2) In the event of revocation, the time spent in parole is
not attributed to the rest of the penalty to suffer.
Section IV
Of the suspension of post-penal measures
Article 65

.- Suspension of post-place measures
(1) On the proposal of the authority referred to in article 40 (2) of this code, the
jurisdiction which ordered post-place measures can, at any time and by
26
motivated decision, suspend special measures or parties or partly
Modify without worsening.
(2) The suspension is revocable at any time in the planned forms
for his granting.
(3) The duration of the suspension of these measures, even revoked, is
counted over the duration of post-place measures. FUCK DE LA REPUBLIE
General Secretariat | M erte ys
Orc HS HOMER AEGISIATE AND REET
Sectionv | conformity
Of the prescription - of. Lamor:
—_——__
Article 66.- Grace
The Grace is the switching or the delivery, partial or total,
conditional or not, sentences, safety measures and obligations of
probation.
Article 67

.- Prescription
(1) The main penalty not suffered, as well as the accessory sorrows and the
safety measures that accompany it, can no longer be executed after
the expiration of deadlines determined from the date of the judgment or
of the judgment which has become final:
a) For crime: twenty (20) years;
b) for crime and related ticket: five (05) years;
c) For any other ticket: two (02) years.
(2) The prescription is suspended whenever a law obstacle or
in fact, except that resulting from the will of the condemned, prevents the execution of
The trouble.
It is interrupted by any act of sentence before the expiration
of the delay.
Once the prescription of the sentence has been acquired, the default convicted
can no longer arise to purge it.
Article 68

.- Dead
The death of the condemned person does not prevent the execution on his property,
pecuniary convictions neither the closure of the establishment, nor the confiscation.
27
Chapter VII
Causes that erase condemnation
Presidency of the Republic |
SECTION! And E Recemene Am!
Of the Rehabilitati Copy Certifiee Compliant
dt
Article 69

.- Definition and effects-
(1) Rehabilitation is a measure which, unless otherwise provided by law,
erases the conviction for crime or offense and puts an end to any incidental penalty
and to any safety measure, with the exception of internment in a house of
health and closure of the establishment.
(2) When a person has been the subject of several convictions, the
rehabilitation must relate to all convictions.
(3) Rehabilitation is acquired either as of right or by decision to
justice.
(4) a) To be rehabilitated, the condemned must justify the payment of
legal costs. |! must also justify the payment of damages
or the delivery of these. Failing this, he must establish that he underwent the constraint by
body under civil conviction.
b) The sentenced for fraudulent bankruptcy must justify the
payment of the passive of bankruptcy in capital, interest and costs or the delivery
that was made to him.
c) If the civil party cannot be found, the sums which
are due are paid to its representative or, failing that, paid to
account of deposits and consignments.
d) If the condemned claim that the civil party refused to
receive the sums due to him, he must provide proof of the refusal
And pay the said sums to the account of deposits and consignments.
e) the quadennale prescription is not applicable in this
matter.
(5) a) Rehabilitation does not automatically restore decorations and do not
reintegrates no office in orders whose rehabilitated has been fallen.
b} Police and security measures striking the condemned person are
not erased.
28
c) the sums paid by the rehabilitated for convictions
pecuniary and confiscations remain acquired from the public treasury.
d) Rehabilitation does not regain automatically in functions or
public jobs, grades, public or ministerial offices, nor does
to career reconstruction.
However, the rehabilitated person finds, if they have been deposed, the
following rights: parental authority, law of supervision, electoral rights and law of
testify in justice.
e) Rehabilitation does not prevent requests for revision tending
to establish the innocence of the rehabilitated.

Article 70

.- Right rehabilitation
(1) The rehabilitation as of right is acquired by the convict who did not
the subject of any new conviction to imprisonment for crime or offense
within the deadlines below:
- CING (05) years for a fine sentence;
- ten (10) years for a single lower imprisonment or lower or
equal to six (06) months;
- fifteen (15) years for a single sentence of lower imprisonment or
equal to two (02) years;
- twenty (20) years for a single sentence of lower imprisonment or
equal to five (05) years.
(2) The period is fifteen (15), if all the convictions are
greater than one (01) year but less than two (02) years.
(3) The convictions pronounced with confusion of sentences are
considered to be a unique condemnation.
(4) In terms of fine, deadlines run from the day of its payment or
the prescription acquired. They run for private convictions of freedom,
of the day of the expiration of the sentence suffered given, if necessary,
graceful discounts or the day of the prescription acquired.
(5) The total or partial delivery of a sentence is equivalent to its execution
partial or total.
. A of the Republic
° Secretariat Gener Al
Or dear legislate and st caentare
29 ——_—_—_ -

Article 71.- Judicial rehabilitation
(1) Rehabilitation can be requested in court by the convicted person.
(2) Rehabilitation can only be requested after a period of five (05)
years in the event of a crime conviction and three (03) years in the event of
condemnation for offense. These deadlines run the day after the day of the
release in the event of a condemnation of a private sentence of freedom, or
day after the payment of the fine.
(3) In the event of a recurrence, the deadlines provided for in paragraph 2 above are
doubled.
Article 72.- Post-mortem rehabilitation
(1) In the event of the death of the convicted person, the request can be followed and even
Introduced by his spouse, his ascendants or descendants.
(2) The public prosecutor may, in the event of death of the applicant, follow a
Rehabilitation request already formulated.
DA |
Of amnesty | CONRON E SOPECERIME |
Article 73

.- Effects AE
(1) Subject to civil interests, the amnesty erases the conviction and
puts an end to any main pain and accessory and any safety measure,
the exception of the internment in a health center and the closure of
the establishment.
(2) Unless otherwise provided, it prevents or stops proceedings not
brought or already underway.
(3) Unless otherwise provided, the amnesty is not applicable to the costs due
to the Treasury, if the conviction has become final.
(4) Unless otherwise provided, the costs and fines already paid by the
convicted remain acquired from the Treasury.
(5) Unless otherwise provided, it does not automatically restore decorations and
does not regain automatically in the orders whose amnesty would be fallen.
30
6) Unless otherwise provided, it does not return to the right in the
public functions or jobs, grades, public or ministerial offices, and
does not give rise to career reconstruction.
(7) It does not obstruct requests for revision tending to establish
The innocence of the amnesty condemned person.
Ill
Of the detailed responsibility of people
Hysical and moral predence of the Republic
Viceou soul legaslan and regulation 3 /
Ee copy certified in accuracy Chapter |
General provisions
Tc

Article 74.- Senior and responsibility
(1) No penalty can be pronounced only against a person
criminally responsible.
(2) is criminally responsible, the one who, voluntarily, commits the facts
characterizing the constituent elements of an offense with the intention that these
facts resulted in the realization of the offense.
(3) Except when the law has otherwise, the very consequence
an omission does not cause criminal responsibility.
(4) Except when the law has otherwise, there cannot be any
Criminal responsibility if the conditions of paragraph 2 above are met.
However, in contraventional matters, criminal liability exists
even though the act or omission are not intentional or the
consequence has not been wanted.
Article 74

-1.- Moral persons criminally responsible
a) legal persons are criminally responsible for offenses
committed, on behalf of their organs or representatives.
b) The provisions of paragraph A above are not applicable to
the state and its dismemberments.
c) criminal liability of natural persons, authors of acts
Back, can be combined with that of legal persons.
31
Pr € from the Republic
In He Aay and Reglemertare
; Certified Copy
Article 75.- ignorance and mobile -
Ignorance of the law and mobile do not influence criminal responsibility.
Article 76.- Execution of Lalo
Constitutes no offense, the fact ordered or authorized by law and
accomplished in accordance with the law.
Chapter he
Causes that delete or adjoin responsibility
Individuals of natural persons
Article 77

.- A fortuitous case and material constraint
Criminal liability cannot result from the fortuitous case or from the
irresistible material constraint.
Article 78.- Dementia
(1) Criminal responsibility cannot result from an affected individual
of a mental illness such as his will was abolished or that he could not have
consciousness of the reprehensicity of his act.
(2) In case dementia is not total, it constitutes an excuse
attenuating.
Article 79.- intoxication
The poisoning that is not voluntary is assimilated to mental illness.
Article 80

.- Minority
{1) The minor of ten (10) is not criminally responsible.
(2) The minor of ten (10) to fourteen (14), criminally responsible, ne
may be subject to one of the special measures provided for by law.
(3) The minor aged over fourteen (14) years and less than eighteen (18)
years, criminally responsible, benefits from the attenuating excuse.
(4) The adult of eighteen (18) is fully responsible.
(5) The age of the author is on the date of the commission of the offense.
32
Article 81

.- Threats
(1) Criminal responsibility cannot result from an individual subject to
an imminent threat and not otherwise avoidable of death or injuries
serious such as provided for in this code.
However, if the fact is an offense punishable by the death penalty or if it
had the effect of provoking death or aforementioned injuries, the author does not
benefits only from the attenuating excuse.
(2) This article is not applicable to those who are exposed
voluntarily at the risk of such threats.
Article 82.- Reverencial fear
The attenuating excuse is applicable:
a) To the minor of eighteen (18) years having acted under the constraint of his parents,
people having custody or customary responsibility:
b) employees, employees, civil servants who acted under the constraint of
their chiefs or patterns.
Article 83

.- Obedience to legal authority
(1) Criminal responsibility cannot result from an act accomplished on
orders of a competent authority to which obedience is legitimately due.
(2) The provisions of paragraph 1 ° above are not however
applicable if the order is manifestly illegitimate.
Article 84.- Self-defense
{1} Criminal responsibility cannot result from an act commissioned by the
immediate necessity of the defense of oneself or of others, or a right
belonging to oneself or to others against an illegitimate attack, provided
that the defense is proportionate to the severity of the involvement.
(2) There is always just proportion between homicide and the involvement that gives
place to fear either death or serious injuries as provided for in
Present code, be Vio! or sodomy.
Presidency of the Republic
General Secretamat
Ser where steel LEGISLA RE £ 1 255: EMEENTAMRE
33
Article 85

.- Provocation
(1) benefits from the attenuating excuse, if there is no disproportion between the
provocation and reaction, any author of an offense immediately
provoked by the illegitimate act of others against itself or in its presence,
against his spouse, his descendant or ascending, his brother or his sister, his
Employer or his employee, the minor or the incapable he has custody.
(2) Homicide and injuries can be excusable if they are caused
by serious blows or violence against people.
(3) They are also excusable if they were committed by one of the spouses
On his spouse or his accomplice surprised in the act of adultery.
(4) The offense is only excusable when provocation is likely to
Deprive a normal self -control person.
Article 86

.- State of necessity
regardless of the legitimate defense provided for in article 84 above, the
criminal responsibility cannot result from the damage made to a property in order to
divert from oneself or of others or a property belonging to oneself or to
others, a serious, imminent and not otherwise avoidable danger, provided that there
has not disproportionate between the harm to rule out and the measure taken to prevent it.
Article 87

.- Effects of the attenuating excuse
(1) When the law provides for an attenuating excuse, the penalties are reduced
As follows:
a) If the death penalty or a perpetual penalty are incurred, the sentence is
reduced to a private sentence of freedom of two (02) to ten (10) years;
b) If a sentence is incurred in the event of a crime, it is reduced to a penalty
Private freedom of one (01) to five (05) years:
c) In the event of an offense, the maximum of private sentences of freedom and fine
is half reduced, and the minimum is that of article 92 (1) of this
Code.
(2) in the event of accumulation of attenuating apology or attenuating apology and
attenuating circumstances, the minimum of sentence is that of article 92 (1)
of this code.
A source or acer legaslative ft reggi eger soul
. Compliant Certiree Copy
34 =
Chapter II!
Causes that aggravate attack responsibility
Natural and legal persons
Article 88

.- Recurrence of natural and legal persons
(1) is repeat:
a) Any natural or legal person who, after being sentenced for
crime or offense, commits a new violation of a qualified crime or crime
within a period which begins to run from the date of the
conviction that has become final, and which expires five (05) years after
the execution of the sentence pronounced or its prescription;
b) Any natural or legal person who, after being sentenced for
contravention, commits a new ticket within a period of time
begins to run from the date of the conviction that has become
final, and which expires twelve (12) months after the execution of the sentence
pronounced or its prescription.
(2) In the event of recurrence, the maximum sentence planned is doubled.
Article 89

.- Officials
(1) The quality of national, foreign or international official, of officer
national, foreign or international public or national, foreign or
international, in charge of a public service, is an aggravating circumstance of the
criminal responsibility against those of them who, excluding the cases where the law settles
especially the sorrows incurred for crimes and crimes by them
committed, were guilty of other crimes or crimes that they are loaded
to prevent or suppress.
(2) In the event of aggravating circumstances, maximum sentence is
double.
Chapter IV
Adjoining circumstances and the choice of penalty
Article 90.- Attenuating circumstances
Extenuating circumstances can be admitted by reasoned decision
in favor of a condemned, except in the matters where the law excludes them
formally. -
=
General Secretariat
5 or Rchier Legaslatif and Regiement Regiement
35 w t © with certified copy
Article 91

.- Effects in the event of a crime
(1) The penalties provided for by law against that or those of the accused
found guilty of a crime and. In favor of whom the circumstances
attenuents have been granted, can be reduced to ten (10) years of
deprivation of freedom if crime is liable to the death penalty, at five (05) years
of deprivation of freedom if the crime is liable to a perpetual sentence, to a (01)
year of deprivation of freedom in other cases.
(2) If, in application of the provisions of paragraph 1 above, a sentence
equal to or less than ten (10) years of deprivation of freedom is pronounced, the
jurisdiction may inflict a fine on the condemned which cannot exceed two
million (2,000) francs.
Article 92

.- Effects in the event of an offense or a ticket
(1) When the attenuating circumstances are granted in the event of a crime
or of violation, the court can reduce the private sentence of freedom to five
(05) days and the fine to a (01) franc or pronounce one of these two penalties
only.
(2} when the law only issues a deprivation of freedom, the jurisdiction
can replace a fine of which is the maximum of one million (1,000,000) of
francs in the event of an offense and twenty-five thousand (25,000) francs in the event of
ticket.
Article 93.- Choice of sentence
The sentence or measurement pronounced within the limits fixed or authorized by
The law must always be a function of the circumstances of the offense, the danger
that she presents for the public order, of the personality of the condemned and his
Reclassification possibilities, and practical execution possibilities.
Chapter V PE € of the Republic
Of the attempt and the co fosua tw Ement ae
Component
Article 94

.- Attempt tt _
(1) Any attempt manifested by an act tending to the execution of a
crime or an offense, and unequivocally involving the irrevocable intention of its
author of committing the offense, if it has not been suspended or if it has
missed its effect only by circumstances independent of the will to
Its author is considered to be crime or offense itself.
36
2) The attempt is punishable even though the goal could not
be reached at the rate of a factual circumstance ignored by the author.
(3) The preparatory act does not constitute an offense.
Article 95

.- Conspiracy
(1) There is conspiracy as soon as the resolution of committing an offense is
Concerted and arrested between two (02) or more people.
(2)! He cannot be conspiracy between husband and wife.
(3) The conspiracy in order to commit a crime or an offense, if it has
not been suspended or if it has only missed its effect by circumstances
independent of the will of its authors, is considered to be crime or
The offense itself.
(4) benefits from the attenuating excuse that who, voluntarily, withdrew from
the conspiracy above all beginning of execution.
(5) is free from sentence, the conspirator who prevents execution or who,
Before any attempted execution, gives awareness of the conspiracy to
administrative or judicial authorities.
Chapter VI
Coaction and complicity
Article 96

.- Coaction
Is co -author, the one who participates with others and in agreement with him at the
commission of an offense.
Preydenc € of the Republic
Gener AI Secretariat
Greenhouse read Achier Legula ne and regiement regue
Article 97.- complicity
+ 7 ms,
(1) is an accomplice of a qualified crime or tooth offense.
a) He who causes, in any way whatsoever, the commission of
the offense or gives instructions to commit it;
b) The one who helps or facilitates the preparation or consumption of
the offense.
(2) The attempted complicity is considered to be the complicity
even.
37
Article 98

.- Sente
(1) Co -authors and accomplices.
The main author, except in cases where the law has otherwise.
(2) Personal circumstances from which the exemption of
responsibility, exemption, attenuation or aggravation of sentence, have an effect
only with regard to the author or the accomplice in the person of whom they are
meet.
(3) The real circumstances have an effect on the co -author or the
accomplice that if he could provide them.
Article 99.- Liability for predictable consequences
(1) The co -authors and accomplices of a crime or a crime or a
attempted crime or offense are also responsible for any other
offense whose commission or attempt is a predictable consequence of
agreement or complicity.
(2) are also punished as accomplices those who, knowing the
criminal leadership of criminals, usually provide them
retirement or meeting.
Article 100

.- Real
(1) Receive the one who, after the commission of a crime or an offense,
subtracts the criminal or his accomplices from arrest or research, or
which holds or has things removed, diverted or obtained using
of the offense.
(2) These provisions are not applicable between the spouses.
(3) The sentences of the reception] are provided for by special provisions of the
law.
Republic
General Secretariat
Nice or Ponier LEGISLA neither and PROFITAL
Opie Certiree Compliant
—————
38
Title IV
Federees laws
Article 101

.- Text offenses. Federated ex-states
(1) Offenses to the laws of the federated states, not planned or sanctioned
by this code or by other federal laws are punished, if the federated law
expressly decides it, of sentences equal to or less than one (01) year
imprisonment and a fine of twenty five thousand (25,000) francs without
be able to exceed five hundred thousand (500,000) francs, or from one or the other sentence
only.
(2} the offenses to the decrees or decrees I have taken in execution of
laws of federated states constitute tickets.
Book
Crimes, delits and tickets
Title 1
Crimes and delits against public affairs
Chapter |
Statelessness damage
Section | o
Of the external security of the State is fa ¥
Article 102

.- Hostilities against the fatherland (IG
Ele
Is guilty of betrayal and punished with death, any citizen who: FS $
DS 7: a
a) participates in hostilities against the Republic; ~~~ of
b) Promotes or offers to promote said hostilities. That 4
Article 103

.- Other crimes punished with death
Is guilty of betrayal and punished with death, any citizen, and is guilty
spying and also punished with death, any stranger who:
a) encourages a foreign power to hostilities against the Republic;
b) book or offer to deliver to a foreign power or its agents,
troops, territories, installations or equipment assigned to the
38
national defense or national defense secrets or ensures
by any means whatsoever the possession of a defense secret
national in order to deliver it to a foreign power;
c) with a view to harming national defense, deteriorates from constructions,
installations or materials, or practical either before or after their
Development of poor workmanships likely to prevent them from operating
normally or to cause an accident.
Article 104

.- common law sentences
In the event of a reduction in the sentence provided for in articles 102 and 103 below
Above, the private sentence of freedom is that of life imprisonment.
Article 105

.- damage punished by a maximum of ten years
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) a ten (10) years and a fine
from one hundred thousand (100,000) to ten million (10,000,000) francs or one of
These two penalties only, the one who, in peacetime:
1. For a purpose other than to deliver to a foreign power, ensures the
possession of a secret of national defense or reveals it to a
unskilled person;
2. In the intention of delivering them to a foreign power, brings together
information, objects, documents or processes including the meeting and
The exploitation is likely to harm national defense:
3. Uss, using fraudulent means, in an installation, a
ship, aircraft or vehicle assigned to national defense:
4. Executes drawings, lifted or photographic operations or
topographic inside military facilities or around them
in a prohibition zone set by the military authorities and without their
authorisation ;
+. Stays, in disregard of a prohibition enacted by the competent authority,
4 AY within a determined radius around a military installation;
3 4; Fluvre without authorization the territory of the Republic in an aircraft
The foreigner;
Pele: organizes, in an occult handler, a means of correspondence or
AE remote transmission likely to harm national defense;
3 3> by acts not approved by the government, explains the
1 EO | Republic to reprisals;
9. | Bringes or trains, without prior authorization from the authorities
Cameroonian authorized, in the armed or police forces
40
foreign, and engages in activities harmful to national defense or
activities likely to possibly expose the Republic to
a rebellion or an insurrection.

Article 106

.- Punished damage of a maximum of cing years
Is punished with imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years and a fine
from fifty thousand (50,000) to five million (5,000,000) francs or one of
These two penalties only, the one who, in peacetime:
1. Maintains with agents of a foreign power, intelligence
likely to harm the military or diplomatic situation of the
Republic;
2. Recruits or enroll, on the territory of the Republic and without the authorization
of the government of individuals on behalf of an armed force
foreign;
3. Exhibits, by acts not approved by the government,
citizens to reprisals;
4. Without authorization from the government, book or communicate to a
foreign power or its agents either an invention of interest
national defense, either information, studies or processes of
manufacture relating to an invention of this kind or to a
Industrial application concerning national defense;
. by imprudence, negligence or non -compliance with regulations, leaves
to subtract or read, in all where in part and even
Iw EY momentarily, objects, materials, documents or information
3 AE entrusted to him or which he has custody, and whose knowledge could
| 14 lead to the discovery of a secret of national defense;
EF by imprudence, negligence or non -compliance with regulations, leaves
| '84 to deteriorate or destroy objects, materials or documents that are
They entrusted or which he has custody, and whose deterioration or loss bears
3 Ba! damage to national defense;
has \
© 7Llétant responsible for supplies, companies or management on behalf of
armed orses, or being an agent of a supplier or subcontractor, made
miss the service or causes its delay, even as a result of a
simple negligence;
8. Being responsible for supplies, companies or management on behalf of |
armed forces, commits fraud on nature, quality or |
quantity of work or workforce or provided;
9, commits or trains, without prior authorization from the authorities
Cameroonian authorized, in the armed or police forces
foreign.
41
REPUBLIC
PRES AGO mental
or p dearlegsat € rme
, Cc € certified confo

Article 107.- Non-denunciation /
Is punishable by the sentences provided for in article 106 above, the citizen who, in
peacetime, did not warn the military, administrative or judicial authorities
From the moment when he is aware of any activity likely to harm the
national defense.
Article 108

.- War
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of ten (10) to twenty (20) years, any citizen
or any resident who, in time of querre and without the authorization of the authority
competent:
a) Maintains correspondence or relations with subjects or
agents of enemy power;
b) Makes, even indirectly, an act of trade with a subject or a
agent of enemy power or with a resident person on
its territory.
(2) is punishable by imprisonment of ten (10) to twenty (20) years who, in
War period:
a) Participate in an army or nation demoralization company
aiming to harm national defense;
b) commits one of the offenses referred to in articles 105, 106 and 107 below
above.
(3) is punished with imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years and a |
fine of fifty (50,000) thousand to five million (5,000,000) francs, or
one of these two penalties only, the one who, in wartime, commits a
any act likely to harm national defense and not otherwise
punished.
(4) for the application of paragraphs 2 and 3 above, are assimilated to time
war and the state of emergency.

Article 109.- Definition of national defense secrecy
Is deemed to be the secret of national defense, for the application of the present
Code, any information of any kind likely to help companies
hostile to the Republic and which has not already been made public.
42
+ Scretamai genes al
Will be dear legaslate and regulatory
© Qopie certified as
Article 110.- Extension to foreign powers
The provisions of this section also apply to acts
committed to the prejudice of the foreign powers to which they were
extended by decree.
Section II
Of the interior security of the State
Article 111.- Secession
(1) is punishable by life imprisonment the one who, in peacetime,
undertake by any means whatsoever to undermine the integrity of the
territory.
{2) In wartime, state of emergency or exception, the penalty is that
Death.
Article 112

.- Civil war
Is punished with death the one who excites the civil war by arming or pushing
The inhabitants to arm against each other.
Article 113.- Propagation of false news
Is punished with imprisonment of three (03) months to three (03) years and a
fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) to two million (2,000,000) francs, the one that
emits or propagates false news, when these news is
likely to harm public authorities or national cohesion.
In the event of reduction in the sentence provided for in articles 111 (2} and 112 below
Above, the private penalty is that of themprisonment.
Article 114.- Revolution
Is punished with imprisonment for life, the one who tries with violence, or
modify constitutional laws, either to overthrow political authorities
instituted by said laws or to put them in the impossibility of exercising their
powers.
Article 115

.- Army band
(1) is punishable by life imprisonment any individual who, in order to
commit one of the crimes provided for in articles 111, 112 and 114 above, or
43
To prevent the action of the public force against the authors of these crimes,
organizes an army band or exercises a function or command there
any or participate with this band in the execution or attempt
execution of these crimes. .
(2) is punishable by imprisonment of ten (10) a twenty (20) years, any individual
Having only participated in the meeting of this band.
(3) constitutes an army band for the application of this article, everything
gathering of at least five (05) people, at least one of which is
Carrying a weapon, apparent or hidden.
(4) the provisions of article 95 (5) of this code are applicable to
Present artie.
Article 116

.- Insurrection
Is punishable by imprisonment of ten (10) to twenty (20) years who, in
an insurrectional movement:
a) causes or facilitates the gathering of insurgents by some means
whether;
b) prevents by any means whatsoever, the summons, the meeting or
the exercise of the public force or takes it:
c) invades or destroys public or private buildings:
d) holds or seizes weapons, ammunition or explosives:
e) wears a uniform, a costume or other official, civilian or
military.
Article 117.- Definition of weapons
Apart from weapons proper, are considered weapons
For the application of this article, all the objects carried with the intention of
Make use to cause bodily or material damage.
The Republic
D San ​​A. Rar
17 "COP CRF Compliant
44
You:
President of Aa Alee
Dear legaslate 81 “ot
Section Ill Pretary Certiaee Confofof
Es accessory sentences
Article 118

.- Special confiscation
In the event of a conviction for one of the crimes or crimes provided for in the present
chapter, the confiscation prescribed by article 35 of this code is pronounced
and may be extended even to property not belonging to the convicted person.
Article 119.- Confiscation of illegitimate goods
(1) In the event of a conviction for one of the crimes or crimes provided for in
present chapter, the jurisdiction may pronounce the confiscation of the goods of the
condemned of any kind whether, divided or undivided, which he cannot establish
legitimate origin.
(2) In wartime, this confiscation is always pronounced.
Article 120.- General confiscation
In the event of a conviction for one of the crimes provided for in this chapter,
the jurisdiction can also pronounce the total or partial confiscation of
legitimately acquired goods.
Article 121

.- Decrection
(4) In the event of a crime conviction provided for in this chapter, the duration
forfeiture listed in article 30 of this code cannot be reduced
less than five (05) years.
(2) In the event of a condemnation of a private sentence of freedom for offense,
pronounced in application of this chapter, the jurisdiction can add these
Decreases for a period of at least five (05) years and ten (10) years in
more.
(3) Post-place measures provided for in article 40 of this code
can be worn up to ten (10) years.
(4) In the event of a crime or offense committed by an official, by an agent or
employee of a public service or by a soldier, the prohibition to exercise a
public service can be perpetual.
45
President of the Republic | Chapter II
Secretariat genel 7
Ervice of the HC Mmer Legasla and Ae € of damage to the Constitution
‘Certified copy
SECTION!
. Electoral delits
Article 122

.- Electoral fraud
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to two (02) years and
a fine of fifty thousand (50,000) has five hundred thousand (500,000) francs or
one of these two penalties only, the one who:
a) is registered on the electoral lists under a false identity or which,
By being registered, conceals that he:
- is sentenced for crime, even by default;
- is sentenced to a deprivation of freedom without higher than
three (03) months;
- is sentenced to a private sentence of liberty with simple stay
or with probation more than six (06) months;
- is the subject of an arrest warrant;
- is failed not rehabilitated and whose bankruptcy has been declared, either by
Cameroonian courts, either by a judgment rendered abroad and
enforceable in Cameroon;
b) using false statements or false certificates,
write down on an electoral list or which, using the same
means, inscribed or raye indüment a citizen;
c) Landed by the right to vote, participates in the ballot:
d) vote either under fraudulent registration, or by taking the names
and qualities of other registered voters;
e) Following multiple registrations, votes more than once;
f) being responsible in a ballot to receive, count or strip
bulletins containing the votes of citizens, subtract, adds or altere
bulletins, or indicates a name other than that registered;
g) the ugly of false news, slanderous or other words
fraudulent maneuvers, removes or diverts votes,
determines one or more voters to refrain from voting:
h) Before, during or after a ballot, by non -compliance with the provisions
legislative or regulatory, or by any other fraudulent act, violates the
secret, undermines sincerity, prevents election operations
or modify the result;
46
i) is guilty of fraudulent maneuvers in deliverance or
production of registration or lists' registration certificates
electoral;
j) uses for other than electorary, personal data
contained in the electoral file! ::
k) The day of the ballot, with violence or not, is an author or accomplice of a
fraudulent removal of the urn or any other electoral material.
(2) If the author or his accomplice is a civil servant within the meaning of article 131 of the
Present code, it is liable to imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years.

Article 123

.- Corruption and violence in electoral matters
Is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months at two (02) years and a
fine of ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) francs or one of these
only two sorrows, the one who:
a) By crowd, by threatening clamors or demonstrations, disorder
electoral operations or undermines the exercise of law or
freedom of vote;
b) The day of the ballot is guilty of outrage or violence against the
= local voting commission or towards one of its members, or which, by
Ks assault or threats, delays or prevents operations
4 4% electoral;
Bes) by donations, liberalities, favors, promises of granting public jobs or
SHR 9 private or other special advantages made to influence the vote
374% of one or more voters obtains their suffrage either directly,
“4 Rr & oit through a third party;
Directly or through a third party, accepts or requests
3 ndidats of donations, liberalities, favors or advantages cited in
Aragraph (c) above;
by assault, violence or threats against a voter, either in him
raising fears of losing your job, either to expose to damage its
No one, his family or his fortune, influences his vote.

Article 123-1.- Wearing of weapons during electoral period
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of ten (10) days 4 two (02) months and
a fine of twenty five thousand (25,000) to two hundred and fifty thousand (250
000) francs or one of these two penalties only, the one that enters a
polling station with an apparent weapon.
47
(2) The prison sentence can be increased to four (04) months and
The fine to Cing a hundred thousand (500,000) francs if the weapon was hidden.
Article 123-2.- Activity or manifestation of a political nature during
electoral
(1) Any political activity or manifestation is prohibited within
public establishments as well as in schools or
university.
(2) Any offense on the provisions of the above paragraph is punishable by a
imprisonment of ten (10) days at four (04) months and a fine of twenty
five thousand (25,000) to two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) francs or one of
These two penalties only.
Article 123

-3.- Hijage of public funds in electoral matters
Is punishable by the penalties provided for in article 184 of this code, all
person who, acting in his name or on behalf of a political party, uses
the funds received within the framework of public funding for purposes other than those
provided by law bearing Electoral Code.
Article 123-4.- Criminal proceedings in electoral morning
Except the case of flagrant offense, no criminal prosecution against a candidate
for violation of the provisions of this section cannot be brought
Before the proclamation of the results.
Section II
Coalition
Article 124

.- Coalition against laws, the functioning of a service and
State security
(1) is punished with imprisonment of six (06) months to three (03) years, everything
individual withdrawing from some part of the public authority and any civil servant
Who, with other depositaries or civil servants, concert or deliberate:
- measures contrary to laws or legally implementing texts
taken ;
- measures, including collective resignations, having for object
main to prevent or suspend the execution of a public service.
The president of the Republic
General Secretariat
Or acmer legislans and re ©
: Certiiee compliant copy
48
(2) If this concert takes place between the civil and military authorities,
The imprisonment is one (01) to ten (10) years.
(3) If the concert referred to in paragraph 2 above has the purpose of a crime against the
State security, the sentence is that of death. Pr de la Republique |
C serve bu ® osu es emmon ”VI
Section il) <~ Certiaee Confopne copy
Empietem S
has

Article 125.- Empietary on legislative power
Is punished with imprisonment of six (06) months to five (05) years, everything
civil servant who:
a) Acts in the exercise of legislative power;
b) Refuses to carry out legislative provisions.
Article 126.- Empietary on executive power and power
judicial
Is punishable by imprisonment of six (06) months to five (05) years:
- the representative of the executive authority who intimate orders or
defenses to courses or courts;
- the magistrate who intimate orders or defenses to authorities
executive or administrative.
Article 127.- Empietary of the judiciary on certain immunities
Is punished with imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years, the magistrate or
the judicial police officer who continues, stops or judges anyone, in violation
Immunities laws.
Section IV
Of the irregular use of the public force
Article 128

.- illegal use of force
Is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) to ten (10) years and a fine
from twenty thousand (20,000) to two hundred thousand (200,000) francs, the one who requires or
orders the action or employment of the public force against the execution of a
legislative or regulatory or legitimate order either of justice,
either administration.
49
Article 129.- requisition of requisition
Is punishable by imprisonment of six (06) months to two (02) years, the
Commander of the Public Force who does not obtain a legal requisition
of civil authority.
Section V
Accessories
Article 130.- DEFUE
In the event of a conviction for one of the crimes provided for in this chapter, the
jurisdiction may pronounce, for a cing period (05) a ten (10) years, the
Decreases of the Articie 30 of this Code.
CHAPTER ILL
Officials committed by civil servants
In the exercise of their function
Section |
Preliminary arrangements
Article 131

.- Definition of the official
Is considered as a civil servant, for the application of any criminal law,
any magistrate, any public or ministerial officer, any assist or clerk of
the state or any other legal person under public law, a state -owned company or
mixed economy, of a public or ministerial officer, any military of the forces
armies or gendarmerie, any agent of national süreté or
prison administration and anyone busy, even
occasionally, a service, a mission or a public mandate, acting
in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of his functions.
Article 131

-1.- Foreign or international public agent
Is considered to be a foreign or international public agent, to
the application of this code, any person holding a legislative mandate,
executive, administrative or judicial of a foreign country, or an organization
international public, whether they have been appointed or elected, and anyone who
exercises a public service for a foreign country, including for a
public organization or a public company.
Le |
General Secretariat
Vice of the Rchier Legislatf and regulates a e
We certified as
50 -
Ss
Article 132

.- Aggravation for civil servants
(1) Subject to more severe sentences if it is removed, is punishable by a
imprisonment of six (06) months to five (05) years, the official guilty of
violence against others. ‘
(2) The penalties provided for in articles 189 (copy of documents
administrative), 206 (documents and permit), 207 (official certificates), 291 (1)
(illegal arrest), 292 (forced work), 299 (domicile violation), 300
(correspondence violation), 310 (professional secrecy), 315 (counterfeiting of
certificate) of this code, are doubled when the culprit is a
official.
Article 133

.- Decrection, confiscation and advertising
(1) The forfeiture of article 30 of this code may be
pronounced against civil servants guilty of the offenses provided for in
this chapter or convicted in application of article 89 of this code.
However, in the case of articles 134, 134-1, 135, 136 and 161 of this
Code, the declines of the artiery 30 are necessarily pronounced.
(2) In the event of a conviction for the offenses provided for in articles 134,
134-1, 135, 136 and 161 of this code, the court is required to pronounce the
confiscation provided for in article 35 of this code, and to order the publication
of his decision by written press, cybernetics, radio or
television.
Section II can be Cantera
Dear Atifs and € 2 Sl Ement + Work
Illegh Pet Pie Certiaee conferme advantages
Article 134

.- Active corruption - ———__— $ - $ - $ ——
(1) is punishable by an imprisonment of CING (05) to ten (10) years and a
fine of two hundred thousand (200,000) to two million (2,000,000) francs,
any national, foreign or international official or public agent who, for
himself or for a third party, solicited, approved or receives offers, promises, donations
Or present to do, refrain from doing or adjourning an act of its function.
(2) The sentence provided for in paragraph 1 above is imprisonment of a
(01) to five (05) years and a fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) to one million
{1,000,000) francs if the act does not fall within the attributions of the person
corrupt, but was facilitated by its function.
(3) is punished with the sentences provided for in paragraph 2 above, any public agent
national or international which requires or accepts a cash compensation or
51
in kind for itself or for a third party, in remuneration of an act already
accomplished or past abstention.
(4) The penalties provided for in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 above are doubled if the
civil servant or the accused public agent is a magistrate, a police officer
Judicial, an agent of an institution to combat corruption, a chief
administrative unit or any other official official or public agent.

Article 134-1.- Passive corruption
(1) Whoever, to obtain either accomplishment, adjournment or
refusal to perform an act, either favors or advantages such as
provided for in article 134 above, makes promises, offers, donations, present or
yield to solicitations tending to corruption, is punishable by the penalties provided for
Article 134 paragraph 1 above, whether or not corruption has produced its effect.
(2) is punished with the penalties provided for in paragraph 2 of article 134 above, that
who makes donations, present or give in to the stresses tending to remunerate a
act already accomplished or past abstention.
Article 134-2.- Exemption from prosecution
For the application of articles 134 and 134-1 above, the person requested
is an example of prosecution if it gives aware of the facts of corruption
to the judicial authorities.
Article 135

.- Interest in an act
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years and a
fine of two hundred thousand (200,000) to two million (2,000,000) francs, everything
civil servant or public agent who, directly or indirectly, takes or receives
An interest:
a) in the acts or auctions subject to his opinion, or which he had
surveillance, control, administration or handover;
b) in private companies, cooperatives, economy companies
mixed or financial participation of the State, management, concessions
subject to his surveillance or to his control:
c) in markets or contracts in the name of the State or a
public community, with a natural or legal person:
d) in a case for which he is responsible for ordering payment
or to operate the liquidation.
Presidency of the Republic
UE Secretama Genef Al
“Service or Romer Legislane F1 26. EMEC Are
A Copy Certifae Confc?: “£ £
52 /[
_—_———
(2) The provisions of this article are applicable to the old
civil servants and public officials as defined in article 131 of this code
which, within five (05) years from the cessation of their functions by
following resignation, dismissal, leave, layoff or retirement, or
For any other cause, take any interest in the acts,
aforementioned operations or companies previously subject to their
surveillance, control, administration or of which they provided payment or
liquidation.

Article 135

-1.- Initiated crime
Is punished with imprisonment of six (06) months to two (02) years and a
fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) francs, the fact:
a) for managers of a commercial or industrial company and for
people with the exercise of their profession or
their functions, privileged information on the situation or
prospects of a transmitter whose securities are negotiated on
the market, to make or knowingly allow to achieve, directly
or by person interposed, one or more operations before the
public is aware of this information and with the aim of carrying out
an undue profit;
b) for anyone with the exercise of their profession
or its functions, privileged information on the situation or
prospects of a transmitter whose securities are negotiated on
a market, to communicate them to a third party outside the normal framework of
his profession or his functions and with the aim of carrying out a profit
undue;
c) the fact for anyone with the exercise of their
functions, privileged information and subject to professional secrecy,
relating to the realization of a project by the State, a community
decentralized or any other legal person under public law, to use
said information to afford or allow others to ask
deeds for his benefit to delay the planned project or
the greater of additional charges;
d) The penalties are doubled if the author of the facts is a civil servant or a
public agent within the meaning of this code.

Article 135

-2.- Enterings to the operation of the financial market
(1) is punishable by a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) at Cing Millions
(5,000,000) francs, any natural or legal person:
false functioning d; A LAG NEN
° U walks; A Sen X or Nate Los 8 “asa re
53 - Copy certified Confc2 :.R
—————
- provides an unjustified advantage to people who have not obtained it
in the normal framework of the market;
- involves equal information and processing of investors or
their interests; .
- Gets transmitters and investors of practices contrary to their
obligations;
-Fournit investment services to third parties, as a profession
usual, without being authorized;
-Efficient for negotiations or exchanges, other than those provided for by
regulations in force, on securities admitted to
negotiations on a market, without resorting to a service provider
investment.
(2) is punishable by imprisonment of six (06) months to two (02) years and
a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) francs or
one of these two penalties only, any natural or legal person
who knowingly broadcasts, in the public, false or deceptive information
On the situation or the prospects of a transmitter whose securities
are negotiated on the market, likely to act on the courses, or which hinders or
tries to hinder, by maneuver of all kinds, the proper functioning of
walk.
(3) Accessory sentences provided for in articles 33, 34 and 35 of the present
Code can also be pronounced by the competent jurisdiction.
(4) The competent jurisdiction may, moreover, if necessary, pronounce a
fine of an amount greater than those provided for in paragraph 1 above until
tenfold of the profit achieved; The amount retained cannot be lower than the said profit.

Article 136.- Participation in a case
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of six (06) months to two (02) years and
a fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to two million (2,000) francs or
one of these two penalties only, anyone who, responsible for
of its functions of monitoring any company, management or concession, or
the expression of opinions on their activities, collaborates or participates in
Anyway whatsoever, to their funding or their activity.
(2) are punished with the sentences provided for in paragraph 1 above, the same
actions committed within five years from the cessation
said functions, unless they are capital received as a devolution
hereditary. =
7 dence de la Rey
54 | COPE certified as compliant m
Ian
Article 136

-1.- Prohibited employment
Is punishable by imprisonment of six (06) months to two (02) years and a
fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to two million (2,000,000) francs or
one of these two penalties only, any public agent who, responsible for a mission
administration, even provisional, or control, surveillance or advice
of a private company, exercises before a period of three (03) years from the
cessation of his functions, a corporate mandate or is engaged, even under a
contract, to an activity paid by this company.
Ction Ill
Incrections against public interest
Article 137

.- CONCRUSSION AT THE DETRAMENT OF THE STATE
Is punishable by imprisonment of two (02) to ten (10) years and a
fine of twenty (20,000) thousand to two million (2,000,000) francs, everything
civil servant or public agent who grants exemptions from rights, taxes,
fees, taxes or contributions, delivers at a price lower than that which is
prescribed, state products, cooperative, community or
public establishment or subject to the administrative supervision of the State or of which
The State holds, directly or indirectly, the majority of the capital.
Article 138

.- Uninformed deficit
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years and a fine
from one hundred thousand (100,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs, any civil servant or
foreign public agent who, having knowledge of a cash deficit or a
accounting deficit in the management of a public agent placed under his orders or
Under its supervision, does not denounce it to the nearest judicial authority or
to his superior. -
£ o € the republic
Article 139

.- Negligence of goalkeeper JEDAPINILENCNAPI LEET
The negligent goalkeeper is punished: | has -_-
- in the event of destruction, degradations or subtractions of goods
referred to in article 187 of this code, of imprisonment of a
(01) month to one (01) year and a fine of ten (10,000) thousand to
Fifty thousand (50,000} francs:
- in the event of subtraction, removal or destruction provided for in the article
188 of this code, of a imprisonment of three (03) months to a
55
(01) year and a fine of ten thousand (10,000) to fifty thousand
(50,000) francs;
- in case of sealing, as provided for in article 191 of this
Code, imprisonment of six (06) days to six (06) months;
- In the event of escape or release, such as provided for in article 193
of this code, of a imprisonment of two (02) months to two
(02) years.
Section IV
Infractions against the interest of individuals
Article 140

.- ABUS OF FUNCTIONS
(1) is punished with imprisonment of one (01) to three (03) years and a
fine of five thousand (5,000) to fifty thousand (50,000) francs, or one of
these two sentences only, any foreign public official or public agent who,
Abusing his functions, undermines private rights or interests.
(2) If the offense is committed in order to obtain or provide
any advantage, the prison sentence is two (02) to
Ten (10) years and the fine of fifty thousand (50,000) to one million (1,000,000) of
francs.
Article 141.- Civil rights infringement
Is punished with imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years, everything
civil servant who prevents a citizen from exercising his electoral rights or deprives him
of the exercise or the enjoyment of the rights mentioned in article 30 (1), (2), (4)
or (5) above.
Article 142

.- CONCRUSSION ATTERTIMENT OF INDIVIDULS
Is punishable by imprisonment of two (02) to ten (10) years and a
fine of two hundred thousand (200,000) to two million (2,000,000) francs, the
civil servant or public agent, the notary, the auctioneer, the bailiff or
the execution agent and their attendants who require rights, taxes, fees,
industrial taxes or contributions or material advantages, without paying the
just price.
Article 143.- Favoritism
(1) is punished with imprisonment from one (01) to five (05) years, everything
civil servant who decides by favor or by enmity against |
Republic
GENERAL SECRETAMAS
Or Achier Legaslatie and AC 2 Setae
__ =
(2) If this official is a magistrate or an administrative authority, the
pain is doubled.
Article 144

.- False in an act _
(1) is punished with imprisonment of ten (10) to twenty (20) years and a
fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to three million (3,000,000) francs, the
civil servant or the public agent who counterfeits or aere, either in his substance,
either in signatures, dates and certificates, an act or written that he has the duty
to establish, receive, see or notify.
(2) is punished with the sentences provided for in paragraph 1 ° above, the one that uses
of an act thus counterfeit or altered.
Section V
Guilty abstentions
Article 145.- Tolerance of a crowd
Is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to two (02) years, the
civil servant who, having power, duty and the possibility of dispersing a
crowd, as defined in article 232 of this code, abstains from it.
Article 146

.- Tolerance of an infringement of individual rights
The official who, having power, duty and the possibility of
prevent, tolerates either violence against people or acts
attacks on individual freedom or civil rights, as defined in
Article 141 of this code is punished as an accomplice.
Article 147 .- denial of justice
Is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to two (02) years of all judge
who denies, after having been duly required, to make a decision.
Article 148.- Refusal of a service due
Is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to two (02) years, the
civil servant, the notary, the auctioneer, the bailiff or the execution agent
which, being legally required to perform a duty of its function, abstains from it.
President of the Republic
. Secretariat Gener Al
Ervice or Rchier Legaslatie and Oe santi ame
57
Article 149

.- Inobestriding marriage formalities
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to one (01) year and a
fine of five thousand (5,000) to sixty ten thousand (70,000) francs, the state officer
civilian which draws up a marriage certificate:
a) without ensuring that the consents necessary for its validity have been
granted;
b) without observing the possibly prescribed emptiness period.
(2) The offense is punishable independently of the civil consequences
irregularity.
Article 150

.- Irregular holding of civil status registers
(1) is punished with imprisonment of one (01) to three (03) months and a
fine of two thousand (2,000) to forty thousand (40,000) francs, the state officer
Civil who:
a) inscribes his acts elsewhere than in the relating to it or which omits to
register ;
b) having received a declaration of birth or death, omit of the
transcribe;
c) celebrates a marriage for which he is not territorially competent:
d) bears a mention other than those provided:
e) deliberately transcribes in its registers, a marriage not having made
the subject of a publication or struck by an opposition without a mainly:
f) transcribes a customary union not attested by those responsible
customary of the two spouses.
(2) is punishable by the penalties provided for in paragraph 1 above, anyone
holding to declare a civil status in accordance with the law which, without legitimate reason,
omit to do so or declares a false or inaccurate act.
Article 151

.- Systematic negligence
(1} is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to two (02) years
and a fine of fifty thousand (50,000) to Cing a hundred thousand (500,000)
francs, any civil servant or employee of the private sector who, by negligence
or systematic obstruction, provokes adjournments,
slowdowns or disorders or are abused
to perform any act of its function.
A septvice of the legislative file and regulation AE
Cetniriee compliant
(2) The prosecution can only be engaged on the prior complaint of the
hierarchical superior.
Chapter IV
Authorities in the authority PU = OE La Republone
Eee Ever?
Section | Ser Achier Form
Outrages and violence in Certiae Confo
__ ———
Article 152

.- Definition of outrage ~
(1) defamation, insult or threat made either by gestures,
words, or cries uttered in places open to the public, either by everything
process intended to reach the public are qualified as outrages.
(2) The exceptions provided for in article 306 of this code apply
to contempt.
(3) Public action is prescribed after four (04) months, at
from the offense or the day of the last act of prosecution or instruction.
Article 153

.- Outline to the President of the Republic
(1) is punished with imprisonment of one (01) to CING (05) years and a
fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to twenty million (20,000,000) francs or
one of these two penalties only, the one who contempts the president of
the Republic, the person who exercises all or part of his prerogatives
or a foreign head of state.
(2) is punished with imprisonment of six (06) months to two (02) years and
a fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to twenty million (20,0000,000) of
francs or one of these two penalties only, the one who contempts the
Leaders of foreign governments, the ministers responsible for business
foreigners of foreign governments and diplomatic agents
accredited to the government of the Republic.
(3) The truth of the defamatory fact can in no case be reported.
Article 154

.- Outrage with constituted bodies and civil servants
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to three (03) years and
a fine of one million (1,000,000) to two million (2,000,000) of
francs or moon of these two penalties only, the one who contempts without
Being able to report, in the event of defamation, the truth of the defamatory fact:
59
a) The courses and courts, the armed forces, the constituted bodies and the
Public administrations:
b) Due to their functions or quality, a member of
Government, or parliament or a civil servant.
(2) is punished with the penalties of the paragraph (1) above, the one which, by
words or writings to the public, encourages revolt against the government
and the institutions of the Republic.
Article 155.- Non-publicity
In case the defamation, the insult and the threat referred to in articles 153
and 154 have not been public, the penalty of imprisonment is reduced by
half, as well as the fine.
Article 156

.- violence to civil servant
(1) is punished with imprisonment from one (01) months to three (03) years and
a fine of five thousand (5,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) francs, the one who
commits violence or assault against a civil servant.
(2) The penalty is a imprisonment of five (05) to ten (10) years and a
fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs, if the
violence or assault are premeditated or if they cause, even
Unintentional, injuries such as provided in articles 277
and 280 of this code.
(3) The jurisdiction can, in any case, pronounce the forfeiture
of article 30 of this code.
(4) If violence and assault lead to unintentional
Death, the prison sentence is for life.
(5) If violence and assault are committed with the intention of
Giving death, the culprit is punished with death. Rone of refusal: nt
RS RT ratings
Section I <p Certiree Compliant
Article 157

.- Rebellion
(1) is punished with imprisonment of three (03) months to four (04)
years, the one who:
60
a) by any means whatsoever, encourages to resist the application of
laws, regulations or legitimate orders of public authority;
b) by violence or assault, prevents anyone from acting to
the execution of laws, regulations or legitimate orders of the authority
public.
(2) In the case referred to in the paragraph (1) (b) above, the sentence is one (01)
At five (05) years' imprisonment if the author or one of the authors is armed.
Article 158.- Group rebellion
(1) In the event that the offense provided for in article 157 above is committed
By at least five (05) people, the sentence is one (01) to three (03) years
imprisonment and five (05) to fifteen (15) years' imprisonment if
At least two of them carry ostensible weapons.
(2) Against any co -author who carries weapons even hidden, the penalty
is from five (05) to fifteen (15) years' imprisonment.
Article 159

.- Political character (repealed) of the republic
Be posed (eo nt br rene |
V Leghsla thememtars
Section III Certified Copy
Influence and fraud
Article 160.- Official constraint
Is punishable by imprisonment of two (02) a ten (10) years and a
fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs, the one who,
by assault or threats, determines an official has an act or
irregular abstention.
Article 161

.- Influence trafficking
(1) is punishable by the penalties of article 160 of this code, that which, by
assault, threats, donations or promises, corrupts a person having
real or supposed influence to obtain public authority or
private, any advantage.
(2) is punished with the same penalties, the civil servant or the public agent who,
for itself or for others, requests, approved or receives offers,
promises or donations to obtain any advantage granted by
the public authority or by an organization placed under the control of the authority
61 |
|
public, markets, companies or other profits resulting from
agreements concluded with the public authority or an organization placed under
control of public authority, thus abusing real influence or
supposed that gives him his quality or his mandate.
Article 162

.- Dispute declarations
1) is punished with imprisonment of fifteen (15) days to three (03) months and
from a fine of CING Mille (5,000) to fifty thousand (50,000) francs,
the one who, by his false statements, influences the conduct of the
official.
2) If it is a declaration made on the occasion of a birth certificate,
of marriage or death, the imprisonment is three (03)
month to three (03) years.
3) In case the false statements are made under oath, the
imprisonment is from one (01) to five (05) years.
4) The penalty is one (01) to CING (05) years' imprisonment against that
which, by any means, determines the inscription of a
Condemnation to the criminal record of a third party other than the convicted person.
5) The penalty is one (01) months has one (01) year of imprisonment against
the one who, by some means that this GOT has c suvtel aqm ent a
Extract from the criminal record of a third party. fe
This AY dear legislati and regulation 4106
COPE CELEITIED

Article 163.- Examination fraud-
Is punished with imprisonment of one (01) months to three (03) years and a
fine of twenty cing thousand (25,000) has two million (2,000,000) francs
or one of these two penalties only, the one who commits fraud
in exams or competitions in order to obtain either entry into a
public service, either a diploma, certificate or title issued by the State or a
national or foreign public service.
Article 163

-1.- Corruption in administrative competitions
or exams
(1} is punished with imprisonment of two (02) to five (05) years and a
fine of two hundred thousand (200,000) to two million (2,000,000) francs
or one of these two sorrows only, anyone, using
corruption practices, facilitates admission or causes the failure of a
candidate for an administrative competition or an exam.
62
|
(2) is punished with the sentences provided for in paragraph 1 ° ”above anyone, in
reason for corruption practices, declares admitted one or more candidates
not having composed. ::
PRESIDENCE OF THE RECOVER |
Section IV Ser Rlégablaie ft res Sme i |
Copjcertified jus fraud compliant
Article 164

.- False testimony
(1) Whoever, in a procedure makes a false testimony likely
to influence the decision and whose deposition has become irrevocable is
punished:
a) When the procedure is information completed by a decision
of non-place, of imprisonment of three (03) months to one (01) year and a
fine of five thousand (5,000) to fifty thousand (50,000) francs;
b) when the false testimony is made before a court ruling in
Criminal matter:
- In the event of a ticket, a imprisonment of six (06) months
to three (03) years and a fine of CING Mille (5,000) to one hundred
a thousand (100,000) francs;
- In the event of an offense, imprisonment of one (01) to CING (05) years and
a fine of ten thousand (10,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000)
francs;
- In the event of a crime, imprisonment of five (05) to ten (10) years
and a fine of fifty thousand (50,000) to two million
(2,000,000) francs;
- in the event of a crime liable to the death penalty,
imprisonment for life.
c) When the false testimony is made before any other jurisdiction,
imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years and a fine ten |
A thousand (10,000) at fifty thousand (50,000) francs.
(2) If the witness has received donations or approved promises,
limited duration sentences, as well as fine, are doubled and
confiscation of donations is compulsory.
(3) The judicial interpreter who distorts the substance of the words or
Writings that he is responsible for translating is punished as a false witness.
63
President of the Republic
COPE CERTIFIEE OO |

Article 165.- False expertise ESE A
Is punished with the sorrows of article 164 (2) above, the legal expert
which files a false relationship which has become irrevocable.
Article 166.- False oath
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years and a
fine of ten thousand (10,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs the game
to which the oath having been referred or referred in a matter not
criminal makes a false oath.
Article 167.- Concentulation of a procedure
Is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to two (02) years
and a fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to one million (1,000,000) of
francs or one of these two penalties only, any part which, by
One of the means provided for in article 318 (1} (c) of this code, holds its
adversary in ignorance of legal proceedings directed against him.
Article 168

.- Deletion and manufacture of evidence
(1) is punished with the sorrows of article 164 above and according to the same
distinctions, the one who, in order to influence legal proceedings:
a) Remove material evidence or prevent a witness from
to present ;
b) makes or uses false hardware proofs or induces a
witness in error.
(2) is punished with the same penalties, the one who obtains anyone who
promise not to denounce a crime or an offense or not to
testify. |
However, is not punishable, in the event of an offense, the fact of obtaining this
promise of the victim or his legal representative without having recourse
to the means provided for in article 161 of this code.
Article 169

.- Tendentious comments
(1) is punished with imprisonment of fifteen (15) days to three (03)
month and a fine of ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000)
64
francs, the one who publicly relates a legal procedure not
definitively judged under the conditions as it even influences not
intentionally the opinion of others for or against one of the parties.
(2) This article is not applicable to reports
of a public hearing made in good faith.
(3) When the offense is committed by the written press, of
radio or television, the sentence is three (03) months to two (02) years
imprisonment and the fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) to Cing Millions
(5,000,000) francs.
Article 170.- Decrection
Individuals condemned in application of this section
are liable to the forfeiture of article 30 of this code. =
Presence of the repubucy |
Section V Repel a lee ave
Of the refusal of justice pe certiree compliant
Article 171

.- Non intervention
Is punished with an imprisonment of one (01} month to three (03) years and
a fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs or
one of these two penalties only, the one who, which can prevent by
its immediate action, without risk for him or for third parties, the commission
of any crime or an offense against a person's bodily integrity,
abstect.
Article 172.- Refusal to innocent
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) months to three (03) years and
a fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs or
one of these two penalties only, the one who, which can not accuse
himself, nor accuse his spouse, his ascendants or descendants,
bring to the judicial or police authorities proof of innocence
of a person temporarily detained, or even condemned not
Definitely for crime or offense, abstains from it.
Article 173

.- Failing witness
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of six (06) days to three (03) months
and a fine of a thousand (1,000) to fifty thousand (50,000) francs, all
person regularly quoted in court to be heard as a witness
which, except the case of a legitimate excuse, does not compare or refuse to lend
Oath or deposit.
65
(2) is punished with imprisonment of six (06) days at one (01) year and
a fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to four hundred thousand (400,000) francs
or one of these two penalties only, the one who, having denounced
publicly a crime or an offense and publicly declared that he knows the
authors or accomplices, refuses to answer the questions asked of this
regard by the competent magistrate or hides it.
Article 174

.- Required required
Is punishable by a fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to five hundred thousand (500
000) francs, the one who, being regularly required as an expert, doctor
or interpreter, refuses without legitimate reason to assist the authority
judicial.
Article 175.- Assessor or faulty juror
Is punishable by imprisonment of six (06) days to three (03) months and
of a cing fine (5,000) to fifty thousand (50,000) francs, the assessor
or the juror who, except the case of legitimate excuse, does not answer the call of his
name or refuses to take the oath required by law or withdraw before
the expiration of his functions.
President of the Republic
General Secretariat
Article 176.- False apologies S r Fichwer LEGISLANF and registered at 54
OPIE certified as compliant
Are punished with an imprisonment of Ur (P1) J is. THE
people referred to in articles 173, 174 and 175 above Quia
False excuse.
Section VI
Non -compliance with certain judicial decisions
Article 177

.- Prohibition of residence
Is punishable by a imprisonment of one (01) month to one (01) year, the one who
appears in a place that is forbidden to him or which moves away from a place which is
assigned in application of article 42 of this code.
Article 178.- Other penalties and measures
Is punishable by imprisonment of fifteen (15) days to six (06) months and
a fine of ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) francs, the one who:
a) exercises a profession prohibited to it in application of the article
66
36 of this code;
b) reopens a closed establishment in application of article 34 of the
Present code;
c) Subject to the provisions of article 177 above
one of the forfeiture or one of the obligations imposed on it in
Application of articles 31, 41 or 42 of this code.
Article 179

.- Guard of a minor
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) month to one (01) year and a
fine of five thousand (5,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs, anyone
does not represent a minor to that to which his guard was entrusted by
even provisional court decision.
(2) If the culprit has been fallen from parental authority, the sentence
imprisonment is brought to three (03) years.
Article 180.- Watchtop
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) month to one (01) year and a
fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to four hundred thousand (400,000) francs or
one of these two penalties only, the one that remained more than two
(02) month without providing the entire pension that he was sentenced to pay
to his spouse, to his ancestors or his descendants.
(2) The failure to pay is presumed voluntary, unless proven
contrary, but the insolvency that residents of the usual misconduct
in particular drunkenness, is in no way a valid excuse reason
for the debtor.

Article 180-1.- REVERSION Pension
Is punished with the penalties provided for in article 180 paragraph 1 above, the one who
prevents the surviving spouse or orphans from benefiting from the pension
reversion due to them.
Article 1481.- Organized insolvency
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years, the one who,
after court decision, even non -final, condemning
pecuniary, organizes its insolvency.
| LB IDENCE OF THE REPUBLIC
Secretamat Genef A1
If Achier Legsu a ne and regulatory re
. Compliant Certiree Copy
67 to
Article 181

-1.- Refusal to execute a court decision that has become
permanent
(1) is punished with imprisonment from one (01) to Cing (05) years, the one who
refuses to execute a court decision that has become final.
(2) is punished with the sentences provided for in paragraph 1 above, the one that makes
obstruct the execution of a court decision which has become final, without
refer to the execution judge.
Criminal proceedings do not preclude prosecution
disciplinary when the offender is a civil servant within the meaning of the article
131 of this code.
(3) The penalty is a fine of two hundred thousand (200,000) to ten million (10
000,000) francs when the author of the offense is a legal person
referred to in article 74-1 of this code.
Article 182

.- Resumption of a building
Is punishable by imprisonment of fifteen (15) days to six (06) months,
the one who, in the three (03) months of his expulsion or his departure
volunteer, reoccupies a building in the prejudice of the one to whom it was assigned
by court decision. L
PREYBENCE OF THE REPUBLIC
Section VII Secretariat General An
Of the obstacle to the exercise of the pre -ges prrr iCs forms
Article 183.- OO Tax Refusal
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months at two (02) years and
a fine of two hundred thousand (200,000) to two million (2,000,000) of
francs, the one who organizes, by any means whatsoever, the collective refusal
tax.
(2) is punished with a prison of six (06) months to one (01) year and
a fine of fifty thousand (50,000) to one million (1,000,000) of
francs, the one who encourages the public to refuse or delay the payment of
Tax.
Article 184

.- Hijacking of public goods
(1) Anyone who, by any means whatsoever, obtains or retains
fraudulently whatever, furniture or real estate,
belonging, intended or entrusted to the unified state, to a cooperative, community
or establishment, or public or subject to the administrative supervision of the State
68
or whose state directly or indirectly holds the majority of the capital, is
punished:
a) In the event that the value of these goods exceeds five hundred thousand (500,000)
% Frañts, of life imprisonment; ‘
iy d) In case this value is more than a hundred thousand (100,000) francs
3,56 and less than or equal to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs of a
Fe Z || imprisonment of fifteen (15) to twenty (20) years:
2388 a) In case this value is equal or lower than one hundred thousand (100
822 1000) francs, of a imprisonment of CING (05) to ten (10) years and
4950 of a fine of fifty thousand (50,000) francs at five hundred
to 25 ille (500,000) francs.
É 1 sentences enacted above cannot be reduced, by
admission of extenuating circumstances, respectively below
ten (10), five (05) or two (02) years and the stay in no way can
be granted.
(3) In cases provided for in article 87 (2) of this code, the
minimum sentence is respectively five (05), two (02)
years and one (01) year and the stay cannot be granted, except excuse
attenuating minority.
(4) The confiscation provided for in article 35 of this code is
necessarily pronounced, as well as the forfeiture of article 30 below
Above, during Cing (05) years at least and ten (10) years at most.
(5) The publication of the decision must be ordered.
(6) This article is not applicable to diversions or
concealments of military effects referred to in the Code of Military Justice.

Article 185.- Unrest in the service
Is punishable by imprisonment of six (06) days to three (03) months or a
fine of a thousand (1,000) to fifty (50,000) francs, the one who disturbs the
operation of a public service to which it is foreign.
Article 186.- Opposition to work
Is punished with imprisonment of three (03) months to two (02) years and a
fine of ten thousand (10,000) to fifty thousand (50,000) francs, that which, by
threats or assault, opposes the execution of works regularly |
69
|
ordered or authorized by the public authority or destroys, abolishes or moves
A terminal delimiting this work.
Article 187

.- Degradation of public or classified goods
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) months to two (02) years and a
fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to one hundred and twenty thousand (120,000) francs, that which
destroyed or degrades either a monument, status or other property intended for utility or
public decoration and raised by public authority or with its authorization,
Either a building, furniture object, natural monument or site, registered or classified.
Article 187

-1.- damage to national cultural and natural heritage
4) is punished with imprisonment of six (06) months to two (02) years and a
fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) to three million (3,000,000) francs,
The one:
a) exploits, illegally exports the cultural and natural goods of the State and
proceeds to all other forms of devaluation;
b) refuses to register in the inventory or to record furniture and
State -owned buildings, local authorities
decentralized or to natural or legal and presenting persons,
from the point of view of history, art, thought, science or
technical and tourism, an interest sufficient to make their
Preservation;
c) refuses to classify or downgrad a cultural and natural good of the State;
d) Without mentioning the status of the property classified, alienated, free of charge or
expensive, said good;
e) affixes posters or installs advertising devices on
classified monuments;
F} exports everything well classified or offered in the classification, unless authorization
temporary export special granted by the competent authority.
2) is punished with the sentences provided for in paragraph 1 above, the one who, without
the authorization of the competent authority:
a) proceeds to destruction, degradation, transformation, excavation,
alienation and pollution of cultural goods;
b) moves or transfers the ownership of the goods offered in the classification and
performs all work other than those of normal or operating maintenance
current ; Predication
Crete Republic
Guess
Come its legslate and ee glementa 97
ECERIFEECONFORME |
70:
———
c) proceeds to destroy or restoration or modification work
well -classified:
d) builds constructions or establishes conventional servitude for
load of a classified building; .
e) proceeds to archaeological excavations of classified sites or
proposed in the classification;
f) exports unconassed cultural goods, including antiquities.

Article 188.- Subtract and destruction of public documents
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years and a
fine of ten thousand (10,000) to two hundred thousand (200,000) francs, that which
subtract, remove or destroy any documents placed in the custody of the authority
public.
(2) is punishable by an imprisonment of CING (05) to ten (10) years and a
fine of twenty cing thousand (25,000) to two hundred miile (200,000) francs, the one who
destroys or degrades the registers, minutes and other original acts of the authority
public.
Article 188-1.- Subtracting and diversion of documents
of public or private archives
Is punishable by the penalties provided for in article 188 paragraph 2 above, all
person who subtracts or diverts public archive documents or
private to which it has access.
Article 188

-2.- Destruction, alienation and illicit export of
Public or private archive documents
Is punishable by the penalties provided for in article 188 paragraph 2 above, all
person who destroys, alienates or illegally exports documents
of public or private archives.
Residence of the Republic
. ng secretamia re and at meneame
Article 189.- Copy of administrative documents We PO LAGUEE CO NForm
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) months to one (04) —A-
Anyone who, without quality or without authorization, takes Tope Fun Document
belonging to an administration.
Article 190.- Dispute of seized property
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to CING (05) years and a
71
fine of fifty thousand (50,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs,
the one who diverts, destroys or deteriorates from the property seized or placed under
sequestration.
Article 191

.- Sealing
Is punishable by imprisonment of six (06) months to two (02) years and
a fine of fifty thousand (50,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000)
francs, the one who breaks legally affixed seals.
Article 192.- Communications with prisoners
Is punishable by imprisonment of six (06) months to two (02) years, that
which irregularly facilitates the reports of a legally held person
with the outside.
Article 193

.- Escape
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) year to three (03) years, the one who,
being legally deprived of his freedom, escapes or who, being admitted or to
working outside the prison goes away without authorization from the place where it is
employee.
(2) The same penalty is applicable to those who release an individual
legally deprived of his freedom.
(3) The imprisonment is from one (01) to five (05) years, in case
escape or release with breakage or violence; It is five (05) to ten
(10) years, if escape or release is made with weapons.
(4) The penalty is from five (05) to ten (10) years' imprisonment, in case
where the detainee is charged with crime or sentenced to sentence greater than
Ten (10) years.
Article 194

.- Real of individuals
(1) is punished with imprisonment of two (02) months to two (02) years, the
Receive of an individual liable or punished with criminal or correctional sentence.
(2) The penalty is the imprisonment of two (02) to ten (10) years, in the event of
concealment of an individual liable or punished with the death penalty.
€ of the Acer Legulan and regulatory
72 | re |
oo
(3) The causes of irresponsibility in the person of the concealed individual and not
Still judged are without effect on the responsibility of the receiver.
Article 195.- Subscription for fines
Is punishable by imprisonment of fifteen (15) days to six (06) months and a
fine of twenty thousand (20,000) has ten million (10,000,000) francs or one
of these two penalties only, the one who publicly opens a subscription
to compensate the convicted of the financial sentences pronounced by
A repressive jurisdiction.
Article 196

.- Poster laceration
Is punishable by imprisonment of fifteen (15) days to six (06) months and a
fine of five thousand (5,000) to fifty thousand (50,000) francs or one of
these sorrows only, the one that removes, covers or lacès a poster affixed
in accordance with article 33 of this code.
Article 197.- Outrage or damage to witness
Is punishable by imprisonment of ten (10) days at one (01) year and a
fine of ten thousand (10,000) to two hundred thousand (200,000) francs or one of
These two penalties only:
a) He who contempts a witness at the rate of his deposition, without power, in
defamation case, report the truth from the defamatory fact:
b) He who causes any damage to the witness at the rate of his
deposition.
Article 198

.- Prohibited publications
(1) is punished with a fine of ten thousand (10,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000)
francs who publishes:
- an act of criminal or correctional procedure before it is read
in public hearing:
- a report of the debates in which the camera was ordered
or children's jurisdiction debates:
- a decision condemning a minor with any means allowing
His identification:
Residence of the Republic
My Secretarlat General
that legilative file and regulatory re
Compliant certified copy
73 in
- Information relating to the work of the commissions of inquiry
parliamentarians, except the press releases from the office of said
Commissions before the submission of the general report;
- Information relating to the work and deliberations of the council
Superior of the judiciary, except those communicated by the
President or Vice-President of the said Council.
(2) is punished with a fine of ten thousand (10,000) to three million (3,000,000)
francs, the one who reports on the internal deliberations of the courses and
Courts.
(3) In the event of a publication by media, the penalties are doubled.
(4) is punishable by the sentence provided for in paragraph 2 above that which, without
authorization of the president of the jurisdiction, proceeds to:
a) any sound recording;
b) Any shooting.

Article 199.- Logeurs register
Is punished with imprisonment of six (06) days to three (03) months and a
fine of ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) francs, the landlord or
the hotelier who, in defiance of the regulations, does not register or inscribed under a false
Name the person he lives.
Article 200.- irregular burial
Is punished with imprisonment of six (06) days to three (03) months and a
fine of two thousand (2,000) to fifteen thousand (15,000) francs, the one who has
A corpse in violation of laws and regulations.
Chapter V
Damage to the guarantees of and.
| Residence of the Republic
Section | GG Ow Pérèr Egslati and AE EGLEMENT
OPIE COMPLOINTED BRAKED
o o l ‘
Article 201

.- State seal 4
(1) is punishable by imprisonment for life, the one who counterfeits the seal of
the state or uses the counterfeit seal.
74
(2) is punished with imprisonment of ten (10) to twenty (20) years, the one who makes
Use of the seal of the India State obtained.
(3) is punished with imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years and a
fine of forty thousand (40,000) to four million (4,000,000) francs that
which contravenes the rules relating to order, manufacturing and
the affixing of the state seal.
(4) In the event of a conviction, the court also pronounces, for a
Duration of five (5) to ten (10) years, the forfeiture planned - ATARTICIE, 30 of the
Present code. President of Repuriove D
Service du Achier LEGISLATIVE AND REGLEMENCTTT
Certified Copy ON /
Article 201

-1.- Other public seals Li
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years and a
fine of forty thousand (40,000) to four million (4,000,000) francs
the one who contravenes the rules relating to order, manufacturing,
detention and affixing public seals.
(2) In the event of a conviction, the court may pronounce, for a period
from one (01) to five (05) years, the forfeiture provided for in article 30 of this
Code.
Article 202.- Treasury effects
Is punishable by life imprisonment, the one who counterfeits or falsifies the effects
issued by the Treasury with its stamp or brand, or which makes use of
effects thus counterfeit or falsified.
Article 203

.- Signatures, stamps and punches
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of ten (10) to twenty (20) years, the one who
counterfeit or falsified either the signature of the President of the Republic,
Prime ministers, or a minister, minister delegate or secretary of state, or
any authority, either a national stamp, or a punch used to mark the
gold and silver materials.
(2) is punished with the same penalties, the one that uses said stamps or
punches or documents or materials coated with the said signatures,
stamps or brands, counterfeit or falsified.
(3) is punished with the same penalties, the one that uses said stamps or
Pays or documents or materials coated with said signatures, stamps
or marks, sincere but unduly provided.
75
Article 204

.- Brands and prints
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years and a
fine of forty thousand (40,000) to four million (4,000,000) francs,
the one who counterfeits where to falsify:
a) The seal, stamp or mark of a legislative assembly, a
jurisdiction or administration;
b) Official header or print papers are assemblies
legislative or jurisdictions or administrations;
c) The punches and stamps intended to mark, on behalf of the government,
weight and measurement instruments or goods:
D} The hammers of the State used for forest marks:
e) Post stamps, postage or response coupons
issued by postal administration, and stamps and footprints
tax.
(2)) is punished with the sentences provided for in paragraph 1 above, the one that distributes,
sells or uses said seals, stamps, brands, footprints, paper or
counterfeit or falsified coupons.
(3) is punished with the sentences provided for in paragraph 1 above, the one that distributes,
Sells or uses said objects, sincere but inducted.

Article 205.- Public and authentic writing
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of ten (10) to twenty (20) years, the one who
counterfeit or altere, either in its substance or in signatures, dates and
attestations, an act emanating either from the legislative power or of the executive power,
including a passport, either of the judiciary, or an act drawn up by a
single person authorized to do so.
(2) is punishable by imprisonment of five (05) to ten (10) years and a
fine of forty thousand (40,000) to two million (2,000,000) francs, that
which makes use of one of the above -mentioned acts thus counterfeit or alien e of repusation 7
Rp rquste and a rl the
Article 206

.- Documents and Cope Certiaee compliant
Is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) mols axtialsaez
- the one who counterfeits or falsifies an identity card, a license
Drive, a hunting permit, a voter card. A family booklet
or a military booklet;
76
- the one who gets awarded, for himself or for others, under a name
Supposed, one or the other of these pieces:
- the one who uses one or the other of these counterfeit parts,
falsified or delivered under a supposed name:
- the one who makes a fraudulent use of one of the aforementioned documents,
authentic but belonging to others.
Article 207.- Official certificates
(1) is punished with imprisonment of six (06) months to three (03) years, that
who counterfeits or falsifies an official certificate.
(2)) is punishable by the sentences provided for in the Bach Ests aline
of such a certificate. General secretariat;
LEGISLATIVE and FORM /?
Onform
Article 208

.- Stamps -poste and tax copy Certiee © SF 4
Is punishable by imprisonment of ten (10) days has one (01) year and a
fine of cing thousand (5,000) has fifty thousand (50,000) francs, the one that makes
use of stamps -posts or taxes having already been used or overloading
Post or tax stamps or abuse a postal deductible.
Article 209.- Postal documents
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of ten (10) days to six (06) months and a
fine of five thousand (5,000) to fifty thousand (50,000) francs, that which
counterfeit or falsifies:
a) Postal, national or foreign identity cards or cards
remaining post subscription:
b) Vignettes, stamps, postage or coupons- |
Answer issued by the postal service of a foreign country.
(2) is punished with the sentences provided for in paragraph 1 above, the one that sells, offers
Or use said objects.
Article 210

.- Imitations
Is punishable by imprisonment of ten (10) days to six (06) months and a
fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to two hundred thousand (200,000) francs, that which
factory, sells, distributes or uses an object or printed which presents with
One of the objects or prints listed in articles 201 to 209 above, a
77
resemblance likely to facilitate their acceptance in place of objects
or imitated prints, or likely to cause a mistake in the minds of the public.
Article 211

.- False money:
{1} is punishable by life imprisonment, the one who:
a) counterfeit or alter the currencies of paper, gold or silver taking place
in the Republic;
b) Introduced these counterfeit currencies on the territory of the Republic or
altered;
c) emits these counterfeit or altered currencies.
(2) if they are other currencies, national or foreign, having or not having
Course, the sentence is a imprisonment of ten (10) to twenty (20) years.
(3) If the atteration consists in the coloring of the currencies having or
no legal course in the Republic or in a foreign country, the penalty is to
Six (06) months at five (05) years' imprisonment.
(4) In case of currencies received for good, but restored to circulation
After knowledge of their vices, the sentence is a imprisonment of three
(03) month to three (03) years and a fine of three times the putative value of said
currencies.
Article 212

.- counterfeit instruments
Is punishable by an imprisonment of CING (05) to ten (10) years and a fine
from fifty thousand (50,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs, the one who, without
authorization, factory or holds instruments, devices, machines or
materials intended for the counterfeiting of the seal of the State, public effects,
Pays, stamps and brands or national or foreign currencies.
Article 243.- irregular detention
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years, the one who, without
authorization, holds an object or document referred to in articles 201 to 211 of the
Present code.
Presidency of republ 0
Certified Copy Conrophe | |
78
Article 214

.- Accessories
(1) Decreases in article 30 of this code may be
pronounced against the culprits of one of the crimes referred to in articles above
this section.
(2) For all the offenses provided for in this section, the confiscation
of article 35 of this code is compulsory.
Section Il
Usurpations
Article 215.- Manufacturing of a currency
Is punishable by imprisonment of five (05) to ten (10) years and a fine
From fifty thousand (50,000) to one hundred and fifty thousand (150,000) francs, the one who,
Without authorization:
a) factory be currencies in some form or name that this
either, or tickets payable to the carrier or which introduces, exhibits or puts in
traffic currencies or tickets thus manufactured;
b) manufactures or holds machines, devices, instruments or materials
that can be used for the manufacture of currencies or tickets
likely to be confused with legal currency.
Article 216

.- Usurpation of functions
(1} is punished with imprisonment of six (06) months at five (05) years, that
which, without title, interferes in public functions, either civil or
soldiers or performs the acts of one of these functions.
(2) The penalty is three (03) months to two (02) years' imprisonment at
the official who continues to exercise his functions after
Official notification of the temporary or permanent cessation of said functions.
(3) the forfeiture of article 30 of this code can also
be pronounced.
(4) In case the culprit takes advantage of this usurpation to commit a
offenses referred to in the Illus chapter of this title, the sorrows it incurs
are those provided for the official himself.
Suck.
Cher LegsLaty © RM service
Article 217

.- Celebration of marriage
Is punished with a fine of Cing Mille (5,000) to thirty thousand (30,000) francs
And in the event of recurrence, from imprisonment from one (01) to five (05) years:
a) The Minister of worship which, not being empowered to celebrate a civil marriage,
proceeds to the religious ceremony without it being justified to him of an act of
marriage previously received by the civil status officer;
b) The Minister of worship who, being empowered to celebrate a civil marriage:
- only proceeds from the religious ceremony of marriage or;
- celebrates civil marriage without being presented to him a certificate of
the civil status officer attesting to the absence of an impediment to marriage
projected.
Article 218

.- Usurpation of uniform and decoration
Is punished with imprisonment of three (03) months to two (02) years and a
fine of five thousand (5,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs or one of
these two penalties only, the one who publicly carries a uniform or a
decoration to which he is not entitled or who present with these a
resemblance likely to mislead.
Article 219.- Usurpation of a title
Is punished with imprisonment of three (03) months to two (02) years and a
fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) to two million (2,000,000) francs or
one of these two penalties only, the one who uses without right, of a title
attached to a legally regulated profession, an official diploma or a
quality whose conditions have been set by the public authority.
Article 219

-1.- Denomination usurpation
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) months to one (01) year and a
fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs or one
of these two penalties only, anyone who, without being empowered
in accordance with legal and regulatory provisions applicable to this type
of groups, uses the expressions of cooperative companies,
union of cooperative companies, federation of cooperative companies or
confederations of cooperative companies, accompanied by a qualifier
any, as well as all the names likely to be heard
that this is one of the groups cited in this article.
President of the Republic
Secretariat Genes 4:
Service or Achier Legislate and Eg Ate
80 FA
Article 220.- Honorary title
Is punished with a fine of five thousand (5,000) to two million (2,000,000) of
francs, the one who publicly uses an honorary title to which he did not
right. ,,
Article 221

.- Common provisions
(1) Articles 218, 219, 219-1 and 220 above are applicable to
carriers of costumes, uniforms, decorations and foreign titles;
(2) They do not apply to the actors of a public show or
to children's games.
(3) in the event of a conviction for one of the offenses referred to in the articles
218, 219, 219-1 and 220 above, the jurisdiction must order this mention of this
decision on the sidelines of authentic acts or civil status in which the title
has been taken. It can also order its publication.
Section III
Guarantees of the national economy
Article 222

.-
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to two (02) years and
a fine of two hundred thousand (200,000) to two million (2,000,000) of
francs, the one who, by any means whatsoever and in order to harm the
State credit:
a) Retland false or false allegations in the public
nature to shake your confidence in the solidity of the currency, the value
public funds of all kinds, those of cooperatives, communities
or establishments, or public or subject to the administrative supervision of
the State or whose State directly or indirectly holds the majority of
capital ;
b) encourages the public, either to withdrawals from funds from public funds or
establishments obliged by law to carry out their payments in
public funds, either for the sale of rent titles or other effects
public or diverts it from the purchase or JA subscription of these.
(2) In the event of a conviction, the jurisdiction necessarily orders the
publication of his decision.
Secretamat Genera) e
Service or Acher Legal Sr this ‘‘
Gore it

Article 223.- Refusal of money
Is punishable by imprisonment of ten (10) days to three (03) months and a
fine of one thousand (1,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) francs or one of these two
only sentences, the one who refuses currency having legal lessons in the
Republic to the competition from its release power.
ARTICLE 224.- Damage to national development
Is punishable by imprisonment of six (06) months at two (02) years and a
fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) to five million (5,000,000) francs, the one who,
In order to harm national development, transfers abroad of the
specialized staff or industrial secrets or delivers industrial secrets or
commercial.
Article 225

.- Loan diversion
Is punished with imprisonment of one (01) to ten (10) years and a fine
from ten thousand (10,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs, the one who, having obtained
a loan of money or a state subsidy, a cooperative, a
community or an establishment referred to in article 184 of this code, in fact
a use other than expected.
ARTICLE 226.- Bringing to packaging regulations
Is punished with a fine of fifty thousand (50,000) to four million
(4,000,000) francs and the confiscation of goods, the one who breaks
Packaging regulations relating to export products.
Title he
Crimes and delits against the general interest
Chapter |
Damage to public security
Article 227

.- Fire and destruction
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) to ten (10) years and a
fine of Cing Mille (5,000) has one million (1,000,000) francs, the one who,
Even if it owns it, set fire directly or indirectly:
a) to places used for the home of others; President of the Republic
GENERAL SECRETAMAT 7
AR EP
Certiiee Corne copy
82 —_—————— < - $ - <——
b) to any land, sea or air vehicle containing one or more
people ;
c) to mines or their dependencies when they are exploited.
(2) The destruction accomplished under the same conditions is punishable by
same pain.
Article 228

.- Dangerous activities
(1) is punished with imprisonment of six (06) days to six (06) months, the one who
does not take the necessary precautions to avoid damage to others
body that can result from its dangerous activity.
(2) is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to three (03) years and
a fine of five thousand (5,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs or
one of these two penalties only, the one who, by serious recklessness,
risk of putting others in danger:
a) by using fire, explosives, fuels or means
mechanical or electrical;
b) by destroying, even partially, works or buildings not
inhabited even if it is the owner;
c) by giving medical or surgical care or providing or providing
Administration of drugs or other products;
d) by driving, arresting or abandoning a vehicle or animal on the
public road.
(3) is punished with the sentences provided for in paragraph 2 above, the one that leads a
vehicle in disregard or poisoning.
(4) In cases provided for in paragraph 2 (d) and paragraph 3 above, the
jurisdiction may order the withdrawal of the driving license or the ban on
Get it for a maximum duration of two (02) years.

Article 229.- Explosive substances |
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) months has one (01) year and a
fine of two thousand (2,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) francs or one of these
only two penalties, the one who breaks the regulations concerning the
manufacture, conservation, transport, import, export and
trade in explosive substances.
Nce of
JMCE ECP AMA :.
COPE OR? Ecr work
ss a ct |
Article 229

-1.- Toxic waste
(1) is punishable by an imprisonment of CING (05) to ten (10) years and a
fine of five million (5,000,000) to five hundred million (500,000,000) of
francs, any unauthorized person who does not eliminate
Immediate toxic or dangerous waste generated by his business.
(2) the provisions of articles 54 and 90 of this code, relating to
Subsis and attenuating circumstances are not applicable.
(3) The jurisdiction seized orders any person found guilty
to have introduced, produced, stored, detained, transported, transit or spilled
toxic or dangerous waste, to eliminate them immediately and to return
places in their previous state.
The jurisdiction can also order the closure of the establishment.
Article 230

.- Public roads
(1) is punished with imprisonment of one (01) months to two (02) years, that
which, without regular authorization, obstructs the use of a public road
terrestrial or a waterway or which makes it difficult to use in
distorting the road or diverting the waterway course either by
constructions, either by abusive use, or by exploitation of land
adjacent.
(2) is punishable by the sentence provided for in paragraph 1 above, the one who, being
responsible for the maintenance of a public road or a work relating to it,
abstect.
Chapter I!
Public Ala Peace attacks
Article 231

.- Public meetings and events
(1) is punished with imprisonment of fifteen (15) days at six (06) months and
a fine of five thousand (5,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) francs, the one who:
a) Participate in the organization of a public meeting which was not
previously declared;
b) makes a declaration likely to deceive the authorities on the conditions
or the subject of the meeting;
President of the Republic
General Secketariat
Service of acer legisla tif et ire
has ;
c) Before filing the declaration or after the legal prohibition of a
demonstration, address, by any means whatsoever, a
invitation to take part;
d) makes an incomplete or inaccurate statement likely to deceive on
conditions of the projected demonstration.
(2) is punishable by the sentences provided for in paragraph 1 above, the organizer of
any public demonstration without a required declaration or after notification of
the legal prohibition.
Article 231

-1- Political manifestation within a
public establishment and educational environment
Is punishable by imprisonment of ten (10) days to four (04) months and a
fine of twenty five thousand (25,000) to two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000)
francs or one of these two penalties only, the one who organizes a
political manifestation within a public establishment, as well as
in a school or university establishment.
Article 232.- crowd
(1) The crowding means any meeting on the public highway from to the
Less CING (05) people, likely to disturb public peace.
(2) is punished with imprisonment of fifteen (15) days at six (06) months that
which, being part of a crowd, does not withdraw to the first
summons of the competent authority.
(3) If the crowd could only be dispersed by force, the penalty is
doubled against those maintained there.
Article 233

.- Armed crowd.
(1) is punished with imprisonment of three (03) months to two (02) years that
which, part of an armed crowd in the sense of articles 115 (3) and 117
of this code, bears a weapon or does not withdraw from
the crowd to the first summons of the competent authority.
(2) The penalty is from two (02) to five (05) years' imprisonment against that
which remains in the crowd until its dissolution by force.
(3) The penalty is from five (05) to ten (10) years' imprisonment against that
which is part of the crowd at the time when in the same time
make use of their weapons. R R DELA MIRUQUE
Service where Rcheur LEGSLATE and regulated am e
as certified copy compliant f
(4) The penalties of this article are doubled, in case the crowd
place during the night.
Article 234.- DEFUE "
In the cases provided for in article 233 above, the court may, moreover,
Pronounce the forfeiture of article 30 of this code.
Article 235

.- Séditioux cries
Is punishable by imprisonment of ten (10) days to one (01) months and a
fine of two thousand (2,000) to fifty thousand (50,000) francs or one of
these two penalties only, the one who utters, in a place open to the public,
seditious cries or songs.
Article 236.- Bandeg
(1) is punished with imprisonment of ten (10) to twenty (20) years, the one who, in
meeting or band and by open force, pille or deteriorates movable property or
real estate.
(2) Sentence is life imprisonment if the crime is committed during
the state of emergency or exception.
(3) Sentence is death if the crime is committed in wartime.
Article 237

.- Detention and weapon
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to one (01) year and a
fine of fifty thousand (50,000) to three hundred thousand (300,000) francs or
moon of these two penalties only, that which, without legally authorization
required, factory, exports, imports, holds, gives way or sells a weapon or
ammunition.
(2) The sentences are doubled in the event of a weapon port outside the home.
(3) is considered to be an accomplice, the one who puts these weapons or these
Munitions to a third party, without ensuring that this third party is authorized to hold them.
(4) In all cases, the confiscation of article 35 of this code is
OBLIGATORY. In the event of a recurrence, the jurisdiction may pronounce forfeiture of
article 30 of this code and order the closure of the establishment] even
LP La Repub q
If it is assigned to any other use. Preece oa Chen. nr
Service where dear lee og ge
86 Certiree Copy |
ee
Article 238

.- Dangerous port of a weapon
Is punished with imprisonment of three (03) months to two (02) years and a
fine of fifty thousand (50,000) to three hundred thousand (300,000) francs or
one of these two penalties only, the one who, even by having an authorization
wearing a weapon, bears a weapon within the meaning of article 117 of this code, in
A place open to the public and under conditions likely to disturb peace
public or intimidate others.
Article 239.- enjoyment disorders
Is punishable by imprisonment of fifteen (15) days at one (01) year who,
under conditions likely to disturb public peace, enter the
land occupied peacefully by others, even if they belong to it.
Article 240

.- False news
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years and a
fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to ten million (10,000,000) of francs that which
publishes or propagates, by any means whatsoever, a news without power
report the truth or justify that he had good reasons to believe in
truth of said news.
(2) penalties are doubled when publication or spread is
anonymous.
Article 241

.- Outrage in breeds and religions
(1) is punished with imprisonment of six (06) days to six (06) months and a
fine of five thousand (5,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs, the one that
commits an outrage, as defined in article 152 of this code, against
of a race or a religion to which belong several citizens or |
residents.
(2) If the offense is committed by the press or radio, the
Maximum fine is brought to twenty million (20,000,000) francs.
(3) The penalties provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 above are doubled when
the offense is committed in order to arouse hatred or contempt between
Citizens.
THAT
Service or acher legislate and reg did not
Certified copy
___
87
Article 242

.- Discrimination
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) months to two (02) years and a
fine of five thousand (5,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs that who refuses
to others access either in places open to the public, or in jobs in
reason for his race, religion, sex or medical status, when
The said status does not endanger anyone.
Article 243.- Public intoxication
(1) is punished with imprisonment of fifteen (15) days has one (01) months and
a fine of two thousand (2,000) to thirty cing thousand (35,000) francs:
a) The one who, having been condemned to a contravention for drunkenness
public, recurrence in the twelve (12) months,
b) Any debitant who serves drinks for a clearly drunk person.
(2) The court may pronounce against the condemned debitant, the closure
of the establishment for a period of two (02) years at most and order the
publication of his decision.
Article 244

.- Reiteration
(1) Article 88 (1) (b) of this code is applicable to a conviction
later for one of the crimes provided for in article 243 above.
(2) The jurisdiction can, moreover, pronounce the forfeiture of article 30
(1) and (2) of this code.
(3) The jurisdiction can also pronounce against the condemned debitant, ia
closure of the establishment for a period of four (04) years at PIUS and
order the publication of his decision.
Article 245.- Mendicity
Is punished with imprisonment of three (03) months to three (03) years and a
fine of fifty thousand (50,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs that
which, having means of subsistence or that can obtain them through work,
requests charity in any place.
£ or prevail legislate and recount
Compliant certified copy
88
Article 246

.- Aggravated begging
Is punishable by imprisonment of six (06) months to six (06) years and a
fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) 4 one million (1,000,000) francs the beggar,
even invalid or helpless of resources, which requests charity in one of the
following circumstances:
a) using insults, threats or violence;
b) by entering, without permission from the occupier, in a home or a
enclosed depending on;
c) By simulating wounds or a handicap to deceive vigilance
of others;
d) in groups, unless it is the husband and wife, father or
Mother and their children, the blind and its driver.
Article 247

.- Vagabondage
1) is vagabond and punished with imprisonment of six (06) months for two
(02), the one who, having been found in a public place, justifies neither
of a certain domicile or livelihoods.
2) The penalties provided for in paragraph 1 above are doubled:
a) If the vagabond is found carrying weapons or equipped with an instrument
capable of committing an offense;
b) If the vagabond has exercised or tried to exercise some acts of violence
whether towards people.
(3) In addition, the measures provided for in article 42 (1 °, 2 ° and 3 °) of this
Code are necessarily pronounced.
Article 248

.- Dangerous preparations
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of ten (10) days at one (01) year, the one who,
In order to commit a crime or an offense, bears an instrument capable of forcing
the entrance to a building.
(2) This goal is always presumed when these facts are committed at night.
President of the Republic
Service or Rome GS PAL ARE
Compliant certified copy
89
President of the Republic
General Secretariat +
Sevice of the dear Legaslative and Reglemen 44K
Certiree Certiree Compliant /
Article 249

.- Games and lotteries EE
4
(1) is punished with imprisonment of six (06) months to two (02) years and
a fine of Cing Millions (5,000,000) to twenty-five million (25,000,000) of
francs or one of these two penalties only, the one who:
a) Without concession contract, exercises the profession of operator of Casino,
operator of public lottery or Paris:
b) Without authorization, organizes a commercial lottery, or operates games
online ;
c) uses the concession contract of Casino operator, operator
public lottery or Paris belonging to others:
d) uses the organizational lottery or operating organization authorization
online games belonging to others.
(2) is punishable by the sentences provided for in paragraph 1 above, the operator of a
commercial lottery which does not comply with the regulations of the games which he submitted in
view of obtaining authorization.
Article 249

-1.- Non-compliance with safety standards and standards,
comfort and Saiubrity specific to the casino
Is punishable by imprisonment of two (02) to four (04) years and a
fine of five million (5,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) francs or
one of these two penalties only, the one who does not respect the standards and
Safety, comfort and health standards specific to the casino.
Article 249-2.- Violation of specifications of the specifications
attached to the concession contract
Is punishable by imprisonment of two (02) to five (05) years and a
fine of ten million (10,000,000) to fifty million (50,000,000) of
francs or one of these two penalties only, the one who violates one
any prescriptions of the specifications attached to the contract of |
concession.
Article 249

-3.- Use of non-approved equipment for casino and
online games
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to three (03) years and a
fine of two million cing one hundred thousand (2,500,000) to ten million (10,000,000)
of francs or one of these two penalties only, the one that uses
Unauthorized equipment to operate a casino or online games.
90
Article 249-4.- Silver money laundering by means of games and lotteries
Is punishable by an imprisonment of CING (05) to ten (10) years and a
fine of fifty million (50,000,000) to one hundred million (100,000,000) of
francs or one of these two penalties only, the one who engages in
money laundering by means of a casino, public lottery
or commercial, exploitation of Paris or online games.
Article 249

-5.- Rebellion in games and lottery
Is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to four (04) years and
a fine of two million five hundred thousand (2,500,000) to five million
(5,000,000) francs or one of these two penalties only, the one by
violence or assault, prevents sworn agents from having access
to the places to be controlled.
Article 249-6.- Advertising in terms of games and lottery
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to three (03) years and a
fine of ten million (10,000,000) to twenty million (20,000,000) francs or
one of these two penalties only, the operator of gambling and
chance titular title who, by any means whatsoever, issues or disseminates a
Commercial advertising to minors.
Article 249

-7.- Access prohibited to games and lottery
(4) is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to three (03) years and a
fine of cing millions (5,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) francs or |
One of these two penalties only, the one who: |
a) does not take measures to prevent the access of a minor to a |
Casino room;
b) allows access to casino rooms:
- the soldiers and staff of the police maintenance in
uniform ;
- individuals in a state of drunkenness or likely to cause
Scandals or incidents:
- to people who have been prohibited by the Minister in charge
Games. Toa Reuruoue
Secretarin Cor Reglemem
(2) is punished with the sentences provided for in paragraph 1 above, the promoter of
online games and bets that do not prevent the access of a minor to these games and
Paris, refraining from adopting the below:
a) broadcast on the home page of the game site and the registration pages
visibly, a text explicitly prohibiting the access of minors to
game service;
b) impose on the player to engage in honor on his age and to enter
its identification data;
CC) impose on the player to use online payment means;
d) Reference your game site in parental control software
in order to prohibit access to minors.

Article 249-8: Transactions
(1) The offenses provided for in articles 249 to 249-3 may be subject
transaction between the structure responsible for regulating games and the
cause. The transaction is only possible in the event of an admission after finding of
the offense.
(2) The amount of the transaction provided for in paragraph 1 above cannot be
less than the minimum of the fine of fine.
(3) the regulations of the total amount of the transaction provided for in paragraph 2 below
above extinguishes public action.
Article 249

-9.- Accessories penalties |
|
In cases provided for in articles 249, 249-1, 249-2, 249-3, 249-4 249-5, 249- |
6 and 249-7 above, the jurisdiction: |
|
- can also pronounce the declines of article 30 of this code,
as well as the closure of the establishment, even if it is assigned to everything
other use;
- pronounce the confiscation provided for in article 35 of this code, as well as
that of furniture and movable effects, fitted out or decorated for the purposes
attract customers, as well as funds and effects, furniture or buildings,
intended to reward the winners.
| President of the Republic I |
General secretariat “
Re conforming c:
Certified Copy compliant 4
92
Article 250

.- Loan loans.
Is punishable by imprisonment of fifteen (15) days to three (03) months and
a fine of twenty-five thousand (25 q00) to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs,
The one:
a) Without the permission possibly required, holds a loan house on
wages or pushing;
b) having said authorization, does not keep the registers possibly
prescribed.
Article 251.- Witchcraft practices.
Is punishable by imprisonment of two (02) to ten (10) years and a
fine of five thousand (5,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) francs, the one who engages in
witchcraft practices, magic or divination likely to disturb the order
or public tranquility, or harm people, property or
fortune of others, even in the form of remuneration.
Pressure of the Republic
Chapter Ill ee Angl
Damage to the Economy Publi Certiree Contortion Ru
Article 252

.- False weight and measurements
Is punishable by imprisonment of fifteen (15) days to six (06) months and a
fine of ten thousand (10,000) to seven hundred thousand (700,000) francs or one of
these two sorrows only, the merchant or the craftsman who holds instead of
his business or his work, fake weights or measures or other
Inaccurate devices used for weighing or measuring its goods.
Article 253.- Provision check
Is punishable by the penalties provided for in article 318 of this code, the one who:
a) Takes a check on a bank or a postal account, even a foreigner,
without prior provision and available or without sufficient provision;
b) After broadcast, even abroad, withdraws all or part of the provision
Or defense to pay.
Article 254

.- Freedom of auction
Is punished with imprisonment of one (01) to six (06) months and a fine
From fifty thousand (50,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs, the one who, per
93
violence or threats, by donations or promises or by any maneuver,
Disturbed freedom or hinders the sincerity of auctions or submissions.
Article 255.- Hopals for freedom of work
Is punishable by imprisonment of fifteen (15) days to three (03) years and
a fine of five thousand (5,000) to seven hundred thousand (700,000) francs or
one of these two penalties only, the one who, with violence, threats
or fraudulent maneuvers, brings or maintains a concerted cessation of
work to force the increase or decrease in wages or to undermine the
free exercise of work or industry.
Article 256

.- Price pressure
(1) is punished with imprisonment of two (02) months to two (02) years and
a fine of four hundred thousand (400,000) to twenty million (20,000,000) of
francs, the one who, by any fraudulent means, operates the increase or
The artificial decline in the price of goods or public or private effects.
(2} the sentence is doubled in case the goods are foodstuffs
food or are targeted by texts relating to packaging.
(3) The jurisdiction can, moreover, pronounce the forfeiture of article 30
(1) and (2) of this code and order the publication of its decision.
Article 257

.- Destruction of foodstuffs
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to five (5) years and a fine
from fifty thousand (50,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs, the one who, in the
aim to act on food prices intended for humans or
animals, makes them or let them perish, corrupt or disappear.
President of the Republic
Chapter IV where RSR Orlaty and Regal IA
Damage to health published confoz ef
Article 258

.- Alteration of foodstuffs has
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to three (03) years and
a fine of Cing Mille (5,000) to Cing a hundred thousand (500,000) francs, the one who,
or aïlère of foodstuffs used to feed humans or animals,
drinks or drug substances, intended to be sold,
either holds products intended or only capable of carrying out this
falsification.
94
(2) The provisions of this article are not applicable to fruit and
Fresh, fermented or corrupt vegetables.
(3) foodstuffs, drinks and medicines, if they still belong to
guilty, are confiscated. If they are not used by the administration, their
destruction is made at the expense of the condemned.
(4) Jurisdiction can order the publication of its decision in
Conditions provided for in article 33 of this code.
Article 258

-1.- Illicit medication sale
Is punished with imprisonment of three (03) months to three (03) years and a
fine of one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) francs, that
Who :
- sells a medication without being legally authorized;
- sells a counterfeit medication, expired or unauthorized;
- holds, to sell it, a falsified, aitered or harmful medication
human health.
The confiscation provided for in articles35 and 45 of this code is
applied.
Article 259

.- False medical certificate
(1) is punished with imprisonment of two (02) months to three (03) years and
a fine of five thousand (5,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) francs, the doctor,
surgeon, nurse, dentist or midwife who, to promote or harm
someone, falsely certifies or conceals the existence of a disease or a
infirmity or falsely certifies the existence or the result of a vaccination or
provides false indications on the origin of a disease, the duration of a
incapacity or the cause of death.
(2) The penalty is from two (02) to ten (10) years' imprisonment in the event of
corruption.
(3) The jurisdiction may pronounce the forfeiture listed in article 30
of this code.
E ?
PCHIER LEGISLA
|
95 ———— <—————
Article 260

.- Contagious diseases
(1) is punished with imprisonment of three (03) months to three (03) years, that
which, by its conduct, facilitates the communication of a contagious disease and
dangerous. ‘
(2) If the facilitated contagion is dangerous for the life of animals
normally intended for human consumption, imprisonment is
One (01) month to one (01) year.
Article 261.-Pollution
Is punishable by imprisonment of fifteen (15) days to six (06) months and a
fine of Cing Mille (5,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs or one of
These two sorrows only the one who, by his activity:
a) pollutes drinking water likely to be used by others;
b) pollutes the atmosphere to the point of making it harmful to public health.
Article 262

.- Rupture of an employment or supply contract
(1} is punished with imprisonment from one (01) to six (06) months the one who breaks
an employment or supply contract while the foreseeable consequence of
This rupture is either a serious danger to public health or for that of
hospitalized patients, either serious body damage, or a
serious deterioration of goods of all kinds, a deprivation of electricity,
water, gas or any other source of energy in the prejudice of several
people.
(2) This article is not applicable to the one who gives notice
Minimum of seven (07) days.
President of the Republic
General Secretariat
CHAPTER V Service or LEGISLATIVE RCE and Regleme 2 7
Morality damage | Pure FEE Compliance |
Article 263

.- Public outrage
Is punished with imprisonment of fifteen (15) days to two (02) years and
a fine of ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) francs or one of
These two penalties only, the one who publicly outrages modesty.
Article 264.- Public outrage
Is punishable by the penalties provided for in article 263 above, the one who:
96
a) publicly heard songs, cries or speeches contrary to
good customs;
b) Attracts public attention to a debauchery opportunity.
Article 265

.- Obscene publications
(1) is punished with imprisonment of one (01) months to two (02) years and a
fine of ten thousand (10,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs, that
who makes, holds, imports, transports or exports in order to make it
trade or exhibits or distributes, even free of charge and even not
Publicly, any written, drawing or object tending to corrupt customs.
(2) The jurisdiction can also order the closure, for a period of
one (01) at most, from the establishment where the condemned man makes or holds
said written, drawings or objects.
Article 266

.-
(1) is punished with a fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to six million (6,000,000)
francs, the one who reports, except by publishing the judgment, trials in
Deciaration of paternity, in divorce, in separation of bodies and abortion.
(2) is punished with a fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to two million
(2,000,000) francs, the one who, without the written authorization of the prosecutor of the
Republic, gives advertising by any means whatsoever to suicide of
Minors of eighteen (18) years. In the event of a recurrence, a imprisonment of two
(02) months to two (02) years can also be pronounced.
(3) is punished with a fine of ten thousand (10,000) to one million (1,000,000) of
francs, the one who contravenes the provisions of article 23 (3) of this code
on capital executions.
(4) is punished with a fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to two hundred thousand
(200,000) francs, the one who, except at the written request of the magistrate responsible for
the instruction, reproduced by the image or in any form whatsoever, all or
part of the circumstances of violent offenses and all those committed
against children or against manners.

Article 267.- Apology of certain crimes and crimes
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) year to five (05) years and a
fine of ten thousand (10,000) to twenty million (20,000,000) francs or one
of these two sorrows only, the one who is publishing rhymes
Presidency of the Republic
General Secretariat J
AR TAF |
97 Copy certified as accuracy of
of murder, looting, fire, destruction, theft as well as crimes or offenses
damage to state security.
Article 268.- Malges on an animal
(1) is punished with imprisonment of fifteen (15) days to three (03) months and
a fine of five thousand (5,000) to twenty thousand (20,000) francs or one of
these two penalties only, the one who exercises without necessity of bad
Treatments on a domestic animal or tamed or living in captivity.
(2) The jurisdiction may also deprive the condemned property of the property of
the animal.
(3) The jurisdiction can also order the destruction of the animal
when his condition justifies this measure.

Article 268-1 .- Sexual practices on an animal
(1) is punished with imprisonment of three (03) to Cing (05) years, anyone
engages in sexual practices on an animal.
(2) is punished with imprisonment of five (05) to ten (10) years, anyone, at
the help of physical or legal violence, forced a person to engage in
Sexual practices on an animal.
(3) In the cases provided for in paragraph 2 above, the court may, moreover,
order the administration of medical care to the person victim of the
constraint, at the expense of the condemned.
CHAPTER VI PRESJDENCE OF THE REPVALQUE
Te and reluctance 4 fs
Cults in Ore Becuses cults
Article 269.- Freedom of conscience Er
Is punishable by an imprisonment of one month (01) to one (01) year and a
fine of five thousand (5,000) to fifty thousand (50,000) francs, that which, by
assault or threats, forced or prevents a cooked
not involving the commission of an offense.
Article 270

.- Offense to a Minister of Worship
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) months to three (03) years, the one who
strike or publicly insult the minister of worship during the exercise
of his ministry.
98
Article 271.- Obstacle for the exercise of a ministry
Is punishable by the sentence provided for in article 270 above, the one that prevents,
with violence or threats, the exercise of his ministry by the Minister of a
worship.
Article 272.- Obstacies to worship
Is punishable by imprisonment of fifteen (15) days at one (01) year and a
fine of five thousand (5,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) francs or one of these
only two penalties, the one who, by disorders or disorders, prevents, prevents
delay or interrupt the exercise of a cult in the places where it is celebrated
usually.
Article 273

.- Obstacle to funeral
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to six (06) months and a fine
from five thousand (5,000) to twenty five thousand (25,000) francs or one of these two
only sentences, the one who:
a) disorder a ceremony or a funeral convoy;
b) degrades funeral monuments;
c) does not fulfill the duty incumbent on him to bury or incinerate the
corpse.
Article 274

.- Violation of tombs and corpses
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to five (05) years and
a fine of ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) francs that:
a) violates tombs or burials;
b) profane all or part of a human corpse, buried or not.
(2) is not liable to the sentences provided for in paragraph 1 above, the one who,
in the interest of science, has a corpse in accordance with
regulations in force.
(3) is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to five (05) years,
Anyone who engages in sexual practices on a corpse. .
; E of the republic |
Me Cro Peglementase |
Rope Cernaee Compliant
re ooo
(4) is punished with imprisonment of five (05) to ten (10) years anyone, at
the help of physical or legal violence, forced a person to engage in
Sexual practices on a corpse.
Ill
Crimes and delits against individuals
Chapter |
Damage to bodily integrity
SECT L:
Homicide and voluntary injuries

Article 275.- murder
Is punishable by life for life that causes the death of others.
Article 276.- Assassination
(1) is punished with death the murder committed either:
a) with premeditation;
b) by poisoning;
c) to traffic the victim's organs;
d) to prepare, facilitate or execute a crime or an offense, or for
promote leak or ensure the impunity of the authors or accomplices of this crime or
of this offense.
(2) There is premeditation even if the identity of the victim is not
determined, and even if the author subordinates his project to the realization of a
any condition.
Article 277.- serious injuries
Is punishable by imprisonment of ten (10) to twenty (20) years that cause
to others the permanent deprivation of the use of all or part of a member, of a
organ or sense.
President of the Republic |
7 F Secretariat General
Or RCH LEGISLATIVE AND REGULATION AN:
7 CERTFIEE EPLOYED
100
Article 277

-1.- Genital mutilations
(1) is punishable by the penalties provided for in article 277 above that which proceeds
to the mutilation of a person's genital organ, whatever the
process.
(2) The penalty is life imprisonment:
a) If the author usually engages in this practice or if he does it for purposes
commercial;
b) If the death of the victim results from it.
(3) The jurisdiction may also pronounce the forfeiture provided for in
Articles 19 and 30 of this code.
(4) The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 above are not applicable if
the facts are made by a person authorized and justified by the need
to save the victim. Delarepublou presidency>
Secretariat Gener Al Wy
COMES LEGISLANE ET AL
Ert!
Article 277

-2.- involvement of the growth of an EE compliance organ
Is punishable by imprisonment of six (06) months at CING (05) years and a
fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs or one
of these two penalties only, the one who, in any way whatsoever,
involved in an organ in order to hinder its normal growth.
Article 277

-3.- torture
(1} is punishable by life imprisonment that, by torture, cause
involuntarily the death of others.
(2) The penalty is a imprisonment of ten (10) to twenty (20) years when the
torture causes the victim permanent deprivation of the use of all or part
of a member, an organ or a sense.
(3) The penalty is a imprisonment of five (05) to ten (10) years and a
fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs when the
torture causes the victim a disease or an inability to work greater than
Thirty (30) days.
(4) The penalty is a imprisonment of two (02) to five (05) years and a
fine of fifty (50,000) to two hundred thousand (200,000) francs when the
101
torture causes the victim or an illness or an inability to work equal or
less than thirty (30) days, either mental pain or suffering or
morals.
(5) For the application of this article, the term "torture" designates everything
act by which pain or acute, physical, mental or
morals, are intentionally inflicted on a person by a civil servant,
a traditional authority or any other person acting on an official basis or
its instigation or with its express or tacit consent, for the purposes
in particular to obtain from it or a third person information or
confessions, to punish her with an act she or a third person has committed or is
suspected of having committed, intimidate it or put pressure on it or
to intimidate or put pressure on a third person, or for any other reason
based on a form of discrimination, whatever it is.
The term torture thus defined does not apply to pain or
suffering resulting from legitimate sanctions, inherent in these sanctions or
caused by them.
(6) No exceptional circumstance, whatever it is, be
the state of war or threat of war, domestic political instability or
Any other exceptional state, cannot be invoked to justify torture.
(7) the order of a superior or public authority cannot be invoked
To justify torture.
(8) The conditions provided for in paragraph 1 of article 10 of this code do not
are not applicable to torture.
"Buck
Section Il Be CT TR
Violence and assault vowing you "

Article 278.- Mortal blows A
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of six (06) to twenty (20) years, the one who,
By violence or assault, involuntarily causes the death of others.
(2) The penalty is life imprisonment in case violence or
assault is exercised during a process of witchcraft, magic or
of divination.
Article 279.- Back with serious injuries
(1} is punished with a imprisonment of cing (05) a ten (10) years and, Silly a
place, a fine of five thousand (5,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs,
102
one who, by violence or assault, involuntarily causes others
injuries such as provided for in article 277 above.
(2) The imprisonment is from six (06) to fifteen (15), when it is done
use of an explosive, corrosive or toxic weapon or substance, or a
Poison or a witchcraft, magic or divination process.
Article 280

.- Simple injuries
Is punishable by imprisonment of six (06) months to five (05) years and a
fine of Cing Mille (5,000) to two hundred thousand (200,000) francs or one of
these two sorrows only, the one who, by violence or assault,
cause, even involuntarily to others, a disease or an inability to
Work greater than thirty (30) days.
Article 281.- Light injuries
Is punished with imprisonment of six (06) days to two (02) years and
a fine of five thousand (5,000) to fifty thousand (50,000) francs or
one of these two penalties only, that which, by violence or ways
In fact, cause, even involuntarily to others, illness or incapacity
work of more than eight (08) days and up to thirty (30) days.
Article 282

.- Disables of incapable
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to three (03) years and a
fine of five thousand (5,000) to twenty-five thousand (25,000) francs, the one who
moves, to abandon him, a person unable to protect himself due to
of his physical or mental state.
(2) The imprisonment is from five (05) to ten (10) years, if the victim
is abandoned in a lonely place.
(3) The penalty is a imprisonment of ten (10) to twenty (20) years when the
guilty is an ascendant or any other person with authority over
LINCAPIBLE or by having legal or in fact.
(4) In all cases, the jurisdiction may pronounce the forfeiture of
Article 30 of this code, as well as the fallen -+parental authority,
for the same duration. Prepare
SE OR RCE LEGISLATIE AND REGULATIONS
Article 283

.- omission to help | “ /© Opethee Compliant
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) months to three a e
fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs or one of
103
these two sorrows only, the one who refrains from bringing to a person in
danger of death or serious injuries, assistance that, without risk to him or
For third parties, he could lend him either by his personal action or in
provoking help. ,,
Ill
Common provisions
Article 284.- Error on the victim
For the application of articles 275 to 281 included, homicide, violence and
assaults are voluntary, even if the intention of the culprit is to reach
Another person.
Article 285

.- Assimilation to violence
For the application of this code, are assimilated to violence and
assault:
a) Administration of all healthy substances:
b) Abandonment, as provided for in article 282 above:
c) Deprivation, on the part of the one who has legal or in fact,
food or care, to the point of compromising the health of a
person who cannot either evade this guard or protect himself
herself.
Article 286.- Medical interventions
Articles 277 A 281 included, are not applicable to medical acts
carried out by any duly empowered person, when they are accomplished with the
consent of the patient or the one who has custody of it.
However, in case the patient is unable to consent, the one who has it
guard or spouse must give his consent, except when it is
Impossible to communicate, without risk for the patient, with them.
Article 287

.- interest of the victim
There is no offense when injuries or violence are
justified by the immediate need to avoid the victim a more serious evil.
_ Presidency of the Republic
General Secretariat
Pope or Achmer legislative and a soul
7 [Copy certified as conforming
104 Qe
Article 288.- Sports activities
Articles 278 to 281 included, are not applicable to acts accomplished
During a sporting activity, provided that the author respected the rules
of this sport.
Section IV
Homicide and involuntary injuries
Article 289

.- Homicide and involuntary injuries
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to five (05) years and
a fine of ten thousand (10,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs or
one of these two penalties only, the one who, by clumsiness, negligence,
recklessness or non -compliance with regulations, cause death or injuries,
work diseases or incapacity, such as provided in articles 277 and 280 below
above.
(2) The penalty is an imprisonment of six (06) to twenty (20) years, in case
One of the offenses provided for in articles 227, 228 (2) (a) and (b) of the present
Code causes injuries, diseases or work disabilities, such as
provided for in articles 277 and 280 above.
(3) The penalty is that of life imprisonment, in case one of the
infractions provided for in articles 227, 228 (2) (a) and (b) of this code,
causes the death of others.
(4) If the homicide or injuries have been caused by the driver of a
vehicle whose driving requires a permit, the jurisdiction can order the
withdrawal of the driving license or the prohibition of obtaining it for a period
maximum of three (03) years and, in the event of a recurrence, for a maximum duration of
Ten (10) years.

Article 290

.- Vehicle drivers
(1) The penalties provided for in article 289 (1) above are doubled if
The offense is committed by the driver of any vehicle:
a) which leads into a state of intoxication or intoxication;
b) which leads without the required permit;
c) who, in order to escape the responsibility he faces, takes the
leak. Presidency of the Republic
General Secretariat
Focphere Legaslative and Regulation 4 ¥ E
7 Aæcopie certified as compliant
105;
Nn
(2) The penalty is a prison of six (06) months to four (04) years and
a fine of ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) francs, if the driver
any vehicle cause, in the circumstances referred to in paragraph 1 below
Above, injuries such as provided for in article 281 above.
(3) In all cases provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 above, the court may
pronounce against the condemned the withdrawal of the driving license or the ban
to obtain it for a maximum duration of five (05) years. In the event of a recurrence, the
withdrawal or ban can be for life.
(4) except the case provided for in paragraph 1 (C) above, is punishable by a
imprisonment of one (01) month to one (01) year and a fine of twenty thousand
(20,000) to two hundred thousand (200,000) francs or one of these two sorrows
only, any driver of any vehicle who, having just caused
An accident, flees to escape his responsibility. The jurisdiction can
pronounce the withdrawal of the driving license or the prohibition to obtain it during
A maximum duration of two (02) years.
Chapter he
Damage to freedom and peace of people
Lique |
Section | D
Departers to Lib Opipcertified compliant

Article 291.- Arrest and sequestration ——————
(1) is punishable by an imprisonment of CING (05) to ten (10) years and a
fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs, the one who, of
Anyway, deprives others of his freedom.
(2) The penalty is a imprisonment of ten (10) to twenty (20) years in one
following cases:
a) If your deprivation of freedom lasts more than one (01) months;
b} if it is accompanied by body or moral abuse;
c) If the arrest is carried out either in view of a false order of the authority
public, either with illegal uniform port, or under false quality.
Article 292

.- Forced work
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) year to Cing (05) years and a fine
from ten thousand (10,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs or one of these two
only sentences, the one who, to satisfy his personal interest, imposes on
106
others a job or a service for which he did not offer himself
Gré. President of the Republic
General Secretariat
Acer Ga Ee 7 /
TA at
Article 293.- Copegee slavery 7
Is punishable by imprisonment of ten (1074 twenty (20) years, the one that reduces
or keeps a person in slavery.
The court may also pronounce the forfeiture of article 30 of the
Present code.
Article 294

.- Postrum
(1) is punished with imprisonment of six (06) months to five (05) years and a
fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs, the one who
causes, helps or facilitates the prostitution of others or that shares, even
occasionally, the product of prostitution from others or receives subsidies
of a person engaging in prostitution.
(2) is presumed to receive subsidies, the one who, living with a person
engaging in prostitution, cannot justify sufficient resources for him
Allow to provide your subsistence alone.
(3) The penalties provided for in paragraph 1 above are doubled if:
a) The offense is accompanied by constraints or fraud or if the author is
armed; or if he is the owner, the manager or the attendant of a
establishment where prostitution is practiced;
b) If the crime has been committed to the damage of a minor person of twenty
and one (21) years;
c) If the author is the father or the mother, the tutor or the manager
customary.
(4) In the cases referred to in paragraph 3 above, the provisions of article 48
of this code are necessarily applied.
(5) The jurisdiction may pronounce the forfeiture of article 30 of this
Code and deprive the condemned for the same duration of any guardianship or
curatorship; She can also prohibit him for the same duration,
Even customary, of any minor of twenty -one years old.
(6) The jurisdiction also orders, in the case provided for in paragraph 3 (a), the
Closure of the establishment, even if it is assigned to any other use.
107
(7) For the application of this article, the prostitute is not considered
as an accomplice.
Section II
Sexual offenses

Article 295.- Private Outline to modesty
(1) is punished with imprisonment of fifteen (15) days to two (02) years and
a fine of ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) francs or one of
these sorrows only, the one who, even in a private place, commits an outrage to
Modesty in the presence of one person in one or the other non -consenting sex.
(2) The penalties provided for in paragraph 1 above are doubled if the outrage is
accompanied by violence.
Article 296.- Rape
Is punishable by an imprisonment of CING (05) to ten (10) years, the one who, using
of physical or legal violence, forced a person, even pubescent, to
Having sex with him.
Article 297.- Subsequent marriage
The freely consented marriage of the victim, pubescent during the facts, with
The author of the facts referred to in articles 295 and 296 above, has no effect on
prosecution and conviction.
Article 298

.- Aggravated penalties
The penalties of articles 294, 295 and 296 above are doubled when the
guilty is, either:
a) A person with authority over the victim or having custody
legal or customary;
b) an official or a minister of worship;
c) a person helped by one or more others.
President of the Republic?
General Secretariat 4
Service or Achier Lecaslate and Regle Far
Certiaee copy =
108
THAT
In gold ay
Slate and Ae
OPE CERNREE COMPLOSE 4
Ill.
Is achieved in peace
Article 299

.- Home viotation
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of ten (10) days at one (01) year and a
fine of Cing Mille (5,000) to fifty thousand (50,000) francs or one of
These two penalties only, the one that enters or keeps itself in the home
of others against his will.
(2) The penalties provided for in paragraph 1 above are doubled if the offense
is committed during the night or using threats, violence or pathways
do.
(3) Pursuit can only be exercised on the victim's complaint.
Article 300.- Correspondence violation
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of fifteen (15) days at one (01) year and
a fine of five thousand (5,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) francs or one of
these two penalties only, the one who, without the authorization of the recipient,
deletes or opens the correspondence of others.
(2) This article is not applicable to spouses or father, mother,
customary tutor or manager with regard to minor children of twenty -one
(21) years not emancipated.

Article 301.- Simple threats
Is punishable by imprisonment of ten (10) days to three (03) years and a
fine of five thousand (5,000) to one hundred and fifty thousand (150,000) francs, the one who,
orally or by all writings or images, threatens to either violence or
assault, either of the destruction of all good, or to penetrate by break in
The interior of his home.
Article 302

.- Threats under conditions
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of ten (10) days to six (06) months and a
fine of cing thousand (5,000) 4 fifty thousand (50,000) francs, the one who, with
order or conditions, threatens others, even implicitly, violence or
assault.
(2) If violence or assault should constitute offenses
punishable by death or imprisonment for life, the penalty is:
109
a) from six (06) months to three (03) years' imprisonment and a fine of
Cing Mille (5,000) to sixty ten thousand (70,000) francs, in the event of threats
verbal;
b) from two (02) to five (05) years' imprisonment and a fine of ten
a thousand (10,000) to two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) francs, in the event of
threats in writing or by images; In this case, the jurisdiction can
Also pronounce the forfeiture of article 30 of this code.
Article 302

-1.- Sexual harassment
(1) is punished with imprisonment of six (06) months to one (01) year and a
fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs, anyone,
using the authority conferred on him by his position, harassment others by giving
orders, uttering threats, imposing constraints or exercising
pressures in order to obtain favors of a sexual nature.
(2) The penalty is imprisonment of one (01) to three (03) years, if the
victim is a minor.
(3) The penalty is an imprisonment of three (03) to five (05) years, if the author
Facts is attended by the victim's education.
Article 303

.- Blackmail
(1} is punished with imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years and a
fine of two hundred thousand (200,000) to two million (2,000,000) francs
the one who, with orders or conditions, threatens an imputation
defamatory or revelation.
(2) The sentence provided for in paragraph 1 above is doubled if it is
Imputation of a crime.
(3) The jurisdiction can, moreover, pronounce (the degances are or to
of this code. Genepa secretariat,
Legaslatie and AF service or file: ement wt
Compliant certified copy
Article 304

.- slanderous denunciation Lo
(1) is punished with imprisonment of six (06) months to five (05) years and a
fine of ten thousand (10,000) has one million (1,000,000) francs, the one that makes
public or private authority a false and likely denunciation
lead to sanctions either criminal, disciplinary, unless it
prove that he had good reasons to believe in the facts denounced.
(2) The imprisonment is from two (02) to five (05) years when the
denunciation is anonymous.
110
(3) If following the denunciation, a criminal prosecution is engaged
Faced with a court of judgment during the fact denounced, he is suspended at the
Continuation of the Denunciation Head until final decision.
(4) The jurisdiction can order the publication of the judgment.
Article 305

.- defamation
(1) is punished with imprisonment of six (06) days to six (06) months and a
fine of five thousand (5,000) to two million (2,000,000) francs or one
of these two penalties only, the one who, by one of the means provided for in the article
152 of this code, undermines the honor or the consideration of a
nobody by directly imputing or not of the facts of which he cannot report
the proof.
(2) The penalties provided for in paragraph 1 above also apply to
defamation authors committed through written press, radio or
television, without prejudice to the right of response or the duty of rectification.
(3) The truth of the imputation can be proven except:
a) when it concerns the privacy of the victim;
b) when she refers to a fact dating back more than ten (10) years;
Cc) when it refers to a fact constituting an amnestied offense or a
having been the subject of a condemnation otherwise erased.
(4) The prosecution can only be engaged on complaint of the victim or
its legal or customary representative, but, until final condemnation, the
Removing the complaint stops the exercise of public action.
(5) The prescription of public action is four (04) months from
of the commission of the offense or the last act of prosecution or the investigation.
(6) This article is applicable to defamation directed against
memory of a dead when the author of the defamation intended to carry
damage to the honor or consideration of heirs, spouses or legatees
living universal.
(7) The sentences are half reduced if the defamation is not public.
(8) Penalties are doubled when the diff J
Pe q Édence de a te ee le le le le
Secretama! Te and Reglemen: 4?
or dear eo onformé
111 - Work

Article 306

.- Exceptions to defamation
Constitute no offense:
1. The speeches held within the "legislative assemblies, as well as
reports or any other part printed by order of this Parliament;
2. The report of the public sessions of these assemblies made a good
faith ;
3. Judicial debates, your speeches pronounced or the writings produced before
jurisdictions;
4. The faithful and good faith report of these debates and speeches, to
the exception of defamation trials;
5. The publication of judicial decisions, including those rendered in
defamation matter;
6. The official report is in good faith by a person regularly
appointed to carry out an investigation and within the framework of this investigation;
7. The imputation made in good faith by a hierarchical superior on his
subordinate;
8. Intelligence given in good faith on a person to a third party who has a
personal or official interest to know him or who has the power to remedy a
alleged injustice;
9. Criticism of a work, a show, any opinion
manifested publicly, provided that said criticism does not translate a
personal animosity;
10. The historical work made in good faith.
CLE 307.- Insult
(1) is punishable by an imprisonment of CING (05) days to three (03) months and
a fine of five thousand (5,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) francs or one of
these two penalties only, that which, under the conditions of advertising provided for in
Article 152 of this code and without having been caused, uses a
person, an outrageous expression, of a gesture, a term of contempt or
of an invective which does not contain the imputation of any fact.
Woence
? ETA tee
112 © € Coane and wheel |
To |
(2) The prosecution can only be engaged on complaint of the victim or
its legal or customary representative, but until final condemnation, the
withdrawal of the complaint stops the exercise of public action.
(3) The prescription of public action is four (04) months from
of the commission of the offense or the last act of prosecution or instruction.
(4) This article is applicable to the insult made in memory of a dead
Under the same conditions as those provided for in article 305 (5) above.

Article 308.- Extortion of an act, a signature, a bianc-seing
(1) is punishable by an imprisonment of CING (05) to ten (10) years and a
fine of ten thousand (10,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs, that which, by the
violence, constraint or fraud, extorts the signature or delivery of a
any part of obligation, provision or discharge, or likely to
Compromise the person or fortune of the signatory.
(2) is punished with the same penalties that, by the same means, obtains the
delivery of a white-seing and fills it with one of the acts provided for in paragraph 1 below
above.
CHAPTER ILL
Damage to the confidence of people
Article 309

.- Abuse of white-seing
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years and a fine
de Cing Mille (5,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs or one of these two
only sorrows, the one who abuses a white-checking that is entrusted to him, to
write fraudulently either an obligation, provision or discharge, or a
mention likely to compromise the person or fortune of the signatory.
Article 310

.- Violation of professional secrecy
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to three (03) years and
a fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) francs, the one who
reveals, without the authorization of the one to whom it belongs, a confidential fact that he did not
Known or that has only been entrusted to him because of his profession or his function.
(2) paragraph 1 above does not apply or to declarations made to
judicial or judicial police authorities relating to facts likely to
constitute a crime or an offense, nor to court answers at some request
whether. Republic
General Secretariat
E or RCHIER LEGSSlatif and regulates "
113 Certiree Compliant Copy
Presidency of the Republic
Secretariat Gener Al
Legaslative and & £ cp service.
Certiree Copy Confc Y
(3) Paragraph 2 does not apply: = AE
a) to the doctor and surgeon who are always kept secrecy
professional, except within the limits of a legal requisition or a
expertise commission;
b) the official on the written order of the government;
c) to the Minister of Worship and the lawyer.
(4) The jurisdiction may pronounce the forfeiture of article 30 of this
Code.

Article 311.- Violation of commercial secrecy
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to three (03) years and
a fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) to five million (5,000,000) francs or
one of these two penalties only, the one who reveals, without the authorization of
that to which it is, an industrial or commercial fact or processes of which it
was aware of his job.
(2) The jurisdiction may pronounce the forfeiture of article 30 of this
Code.
Article 311

-1.- Inobessed registration formalities in the register
Commerce and furniture credit
Is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to three (03) years and a
fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) to five million (5,000,000) francs or
one of these two penalties only, anyone held to accomplish a
formality relating to registration in the Trade and Furniture Credit Register,
who abstains from it or who performs a relative formality by fraud.
The competent court orders, if necessary, the rectification of
Inaccurate mentions and transcriptions.
Article 311

-2.- Non-indication of the quality of tenant-manager of a
business
Is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to three (03) years and a
fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) to five million (5,000,000) francs or
moon of these two penalties only, the tenant-manager of a fund of
trade which omits to indicate this quality at the top of its order orders,
invoices and other financial or commercial documents, as well as
Its registration number in the Trade and Furniture Credit Register.
114
The competent court orders, if necessary, the regularization of
This formality.
Article 311

-3.- fraudulent registration of a mobile safety
Is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to three (03) years and a
fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) to five million (5,000,000) francs or
one of these two penalties only, anyone who registers a safety
movable either by fraud or by carrying inaccurate inscriptions or
bad faith data.
The competent jurisdiction orders, I have grown in Jnscripti the
rectification of inaccurate notices. CER]
General Secretariat
Dear legaslative service and ay rules
Certiree Compliance Copy
Article 312

.- Corruption of private sector agents /
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to five (08) years and a
fine of two hundred thousand (200,000) to two million (2,000,000) francs,
the one who does directly or indirectly, offers, promises,
donations, presents or advantages to obtain from a person
which, without being a depositary of the public authority or responsible for a mission of
public service, exercises, within the framework of a professional or social activity,
a management function or a work for a natural or legal person,
or any organization, so that it completes or abstains
to perform an act of its activity or its function, or facilitates the commission
of the said act by its activity or its function, in violation of its obligations
legal, contractual or professional.
(2) is punishable by the sentences provided for in paragraph 1 ™ above that which, whatever
either the moment, without being a depositary of the public authority or responsible for a
public service mission, and exercising as part of an activity
professional or social, management function or work for a
natural or legal person or any organization, gives way to
requests, accept offers, donations, promises, present or advantages
any, in order to accomplish or refrain from performing an act of his
activity or function, or facilitates the commission of said act by its activity or
its function, in violation of its legal, contractual or
professional.

Article 313.- Deception towards partners
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years and a
fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) francs, everything
118
Director, manager, administrator or account controller of a company who,
in order to mislead one or more partners, shareholders or
Creditors, makes a false declaration or provides a false account.
(2) The jurisdiction can, moreover, pronounce the forfeiture of article 30
of this code.
Article 313

-1.- No declaration of the conflict of interest
Is punished with imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years and a fine
From two hundred thousand (200,000) to two million (2,000,000) francs, the agent
public or the private sector employee who, having by himself or by
person interposed and under any name whatsoever, in a
company or in a sector subject to its direct control or in relation to
him, interests likely to compromise or restrict his independence,
refrains from making it the declaration to his hierarchical superiors.
Article 314

.- False in private or trade
(1) is punished with imprisonment of three (03) to eight (08) years and a
fine of fifty thousand (50,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs, the one who
counterfeit or falsify a private writing bearing obligation, provision or
discharges either in the substance, or in signatures, dates or certificates.
(2) The penalty is a imprisonment of CING (05) to ten (10) years and
the fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) to two million (2,000,000) francs if it is
either :
a) a writing of trade or bank;
b) a writing attesting to a land law;
c) of the mandate to sign one of the writings referred to in (a) and (b);
d) a will.
(3) is punished with the sentences provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 above, the one that makes
use be:
a) one of the aforementioned writings;
b) an expired writing by presenting it as always valid;
c) a writing referring to another person by pretending to be
This person.
Pressure of the Republic ”
Service where Acmer LegsLaty LT EECUE F
Certihee Confother / copy /
116

Article 314-1.- Accounting defects, irregular outfit or absence of
accounting
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of five (05) a ten (10) years and a
fine of two hundred thousand (200,000) to two million (2,000,000) francs
Whoever, deliberately, establishes accounts outside the book, uses false
documents, records inaccurate revenues and expenses, or destroys
accounting documents earlier than the law provides.
(2) The penalties provided for in paragraph 1 above are doubled if the author is
an officially recognized professional in terms of accounting, or if
Product accounts have been exact certified by such a professional.
(3) when the establishment or certification of false accounts have for
aim to hide acts constituting corruption, damage to fortune
public, sentences are those applicable to the latter offenses.
Article 315

.- certificate counterfeiting
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) month to one (01) year, the one who
counterfeit or falsify a private certificate or which issues a false certificate, no
Otherwise punished, or which makes use of a counterfeit private certificate, falsified or false.
(2) The sentence provided for in paragraph 1 above is doubled in the event of
counterfeiting, manufacturing or use of a medical certificate or
Private writing not provided for in article 314 above.
Chapter IV
Damage to the nearly property of the Republic
Section | / Come certified as conforming
Destruction + —————
Article 316

.- Destruction
Is punished with imprisonment of fifteen (15) days at three (03) years and
a fine of five thousand (5,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) francs or one of
these two sorrows only, the one who destroys, even partially, all good
belonging, in whole or in part, to others, or burdened with a charge in favor
of others.
(2) The penalty is a imprisonment of two (02) to ten (10) years and
the fine of ten thousand (10,000) to Cing a hundred thousand (500,000) francs or one of these
117
only two sorrows, if the destruction relates to buildings, works,
ships or installations.
Article 317

.- Destruction of terminals or clinics
Is punishable by imprisonment of fifteen (15) days at one (01) year and a
fine of five thousand (5,000) to fifty thousand (50,000) francs, the one who, ie:
a} deletes or moves a terminal or any other sign established for
mark the limit between different properties;
b) Destroys a fence of any kind.
Ection he
Infractions against the fortune of others
Article 318

.- Voi, breach of trust, scam
(1) is punishable by an imprisonment of CING (5) to ten (10) years and a
fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs, the one who
involves the fortune of others:
a) By theft, that is to say by subtracting the thing from others;
b) by breach of confidence, that is to say by diverting or destroying or
dissipating all well likely to be subtracted and which he received, at the expense of
Keep, make it, represent it or make it determined use.
However, this paragraph does not apply to the loan of money, or
Consumer loan:
c) By scam, that is to say by fallaciously determining the victim
either by maneuvers or by affirming or hiding a fact.
(3) The jurisdiction can, moreover, pronounce the forfeiture of article 30
of this code.
PS
General Secretariat
Vic Sou File Legislatif and Pégémentame
Article 319

.- Flight and special trust Opie certified as
Article 318 above is applicable: |
1. to the one who appropriates an energy from a force
motor or any device;
118 |
2. to those who, without intended to appropriate the thing of others,
uses it without law;
3. To the one who appropriates a lost thing;
4. To the GAGIST debtor who subtracts or diverts the good waged.
Article 320.- aggravated flight
(1} the sorrows of article 318 above are doubled if the flight has been
clerk be:
a) using violence;
b) with wearing of a weapon;
c) by external break -in, by climbing or using a false key;
d) Using a motor vehicle.
(2) is punished with the death penalty, whoever commits a flight with
violence that led to the death of others or serious injuries, such as
provided for in articles 277 and 279 of this code.
Article 321

.- Aggranged confidence and scam
The penalties of article 318 above are doubled if the breach of confidence
or the scam were committed either:
a) by a lawyer, notary, auctioneer, bailiff, agent
execution or by a business agent;
b) by an employee in the prejudice of his employer or vice versa;
c) by a person appealing or having called on the public.
Article 322

.- Filouteries
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of five (05) days to six (06) months and,
a fine of Cing Mille (5,000) has twenty five thousand (25,000) francs, the one who,
being unable to pay the price relating to it:
a) is served as drinks or foods that he consumed on site;
b) occupies a room in a hetel; |
) PE | If mrt republique \
c) Rent up a space car. Raei arat gene pe Glément ape \
Craks (ECA NRORME
ER - \
119 |
(2) In cases provided for in paragraph 1 (a) and (b), the duration of the supply of
drinks or foods or the occupation of the accommodation must not have
Exasperated a week.
(3) is punished with the same penalties, the one who without right, retains the thing from others.
Article 322

-1.- Rental filout
(1) is punished with imprisonment of six (06) months to three (03) years and a
fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) to three hundred thousand (300,000) francs or one
of these two penalties only, the lease, duly recorded, of a
building built or not which, two months' rents from rent, has neither paid said
rents, nor released the building concerned one month after summons to pay or
release the premises.
(2) In the event of a conviction, the court also orders the expulsion of the
lessee and any occupant of his leader.
Article 322-2.- Damage of rented places
Is punished with the penalties provided for in article 322-1 above, the lessee who, at
moment to release the premises, deteriorates these or the equipment being there.
Article 322

-3.- damage to the privilege of the building lessor
Is punishable by imprisonment of six (06) months to three (03) years and a
fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) to three hundred thousand (300,000) francs or one
of these two penalties only, the building lessee or any other person
which, by fraudulent maneuvers, completely or partially deprives I
lessor of his privilege.
Article 323.- Immunities
Articles 318, 319, 322, 322-1 and 322-2 of this code are not
applicable between spouses, between ascendants and legitimate descendants or
adoptive, or between ascendants and natural descendants until the second
degree if they live together or are recognized, against the widower or
widowed, on the basic necessities that belonged to the deceased spouse.
Article 324

.- Real
(1) is punished with the sorrows of article 318 above the one who holds or
has things obtained using an offense, oneself has,
either having reasons to suspect the origin Wélict uses: Evene
See Achier LEGISLAN and regulatory
€ Certiaee compliant
120
(2) In the event of a crime, the penalties are doubled.
Article 325.- Wear
(1) is punished with a fine of five thousand (5,000) to one million (1,000,000) of
francs, the lender who requires or receives interest or other compensation
higher than the rates set by law, for loans of the same kind.
(2) In the event of a recurrence, the sentence is an imprisonment of fifteen (15)
days at one (01) year and the fine is doubled.
(3) Jurisdiction may order the publication of its decision in
Conditions provided for in article 33 of this code.
(4) For the application of this article, as Idré
as an accomplice. GENERAL SECRETAMAT there
Certainly OC € or % copy
Article 326

.- Prohibited sales nor
Is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) months to one (01) year and a
fine of two hundred (200,000) to two million (2,000,000) francs or
one of these two sorrows only the one who:
a) offers goods to the public by letting him hope
free of these goods or a price reduction if it places good
to third parties or determines third parties for purchase;
b) send the goods to a recipient without prior request
of this one, by indicating to him that he has the choice between the purchase or the dismissal, even
If this dismissal can be made free of charge for the recipient.
Article 327

.- attack on literary and artistic property
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of five (05) to ten (10) years and a
fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to ten million (10,000,000) francs
or one of these two penalties only, the one who:
a) exploits a literary or artistic work in violation of the law, by
representation, reproduction, transformation or distribution by some
means that it is;
b) reproduced, communicates to the public or makes available to the public by
sale, exchange, rental of an interpretation, a phonogram, a
videogram, made without authorization, when it is required, to
the artist-interpreter, the producer of phonograms or
videograms, or audio-visual communication company:
121
c) undermines moral law by violation of the right of disclosure, the right to
Paternity or the right to respect a literary or artistic work:
d) undermines the right to paternity and the right to the integrity of the service
of the interpreter artist; ,,
e) import, export, sell or sell counterfeiting objects;
f) import or export phonograms or videograms made without
authorization, when required, of the interpreter or producer
phonograms or videograms;
g) Factory Sciernment or imports, with a view to sale or rental, or
install equipment, equipment, device or instrument designed, in whole or
part, to fraudulently capture television programs, when
These programs are reserved for a determined audience that accesses it
with a remuneration paid to its operator or their beneficiaries
right or assisting cause;
h) fraudulently neutralizes effective technical measures including
holders of copyright and neighboring rights are used for
protection of their productions against unauthorized acts;
i) lets reproduce or represent in his establishment, in a
irregular, productions protected under the law;
j) refrains from pouring or paying with unjustified delay a remuneration
provided by law;
k) deletes or modifies, without being empowered, any information relating to
rights regime in electronic form;
|) Distributes, imports for distribution purposes or communicates to the public, without
be empowered, originals or copies of works,
interpretations, videograms, phonograms, programs
knowing that information relating to the rights regime is
presenting in electronic form have been deleted or modified without
authorisation.
(2) by "information on the rights regime", we must hear
information that identifies the work, interpretation, videogram,
phonogram or program, or information on conditions and
procedures for using these productions, and any number or code representing
this information when one of these information is attached to
the copy of a production or is linked to the communication of a production in
audience.
(3) The penalties provided for in paragraph 1 above are doubled when the author
of the offense is the contracting partner of the holder of the Republic
General Secretariat
$ Achier Legasla Tif and Regulation Are
Oor certified as compliant
122
(4) Jurisdiction can order the confiscation of counterfeit copies
and equipment used to the commission of the offense, as well as
Recipes she would have given the author of the offense.
(5) The competent jurisdiction may also order the destruction of
material used and counterfeit copies, as well as the publication of its
decision under the conditions provided for in article 33 of this code.

Article 328.- involvement in the invention patent
(1} is punished with a fine of one million (1,000,000) to three million
(3,000,000) francs who operates an invention certificate indis.
conceals, sells, exports or imports a counterfeit or counterfeiting object.
(2} in the event of a recurrence or if the author is or has been used in
The establishment where the patent was regularly expiored, a penalty
imprisonment from one (01) to six (06) months can, moreover, be pronounced.
(3) In all cases, the jurisdiction must order the confiscation of the object
counterfeit for the benefit of the owner of the patent and can order the publication of
His decision under the conditions provided for in article 33 of this code.
(4) The jurisdiction rules on the exceptions which would be drawn by the accused
either of the nullity or forfeiture of the patent, or questions relating to the
property of the said patent.
(4) Public action can only be initiated on the complaint of the part
injured.
Article 329

.- Industrial drawings and models
(1) is punished with a fine of one million (10,000,000) to six million
(6,000,000) francs that which operates a drawing or a model
deposited.
(2) In the event of a recurrence or if the culprit works or worked for the game
injured, a sentence of one to six months' imprisonment can, moreover, be
pronounced.
(3) In the cases provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 above, the jurisdiction orders
confiscation, for the benefit of the injured parts, objects from the exploitation
undue of the registered trademarks. President of the Republic "=,
General Secretariat 4
Service or buy legislative and regclemedt ay e
Certified Copy compliance) (
123 -
(4) The condemned person is deposed from the right of voter, the right of eligibility and
any elective or nominative mandate to consular, trade or
industry for a period of ten (10) years.
(5) The jurisdiction rules on the exceptions which would be drawn by the
warned, either of the nullity or forfeiture of the patent, or questions
relating to the ownership of said patent.
(6) The jurisdiction orders the publication of his decision under the conditions
provided for in article 33 of this code.
(7) Public action can only be initiated on the complaint of the part
injured.

Article 330

.- Factory or commerce brands
(t) is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months at two (02) years and
a fine of one million (1,000,000) has six (6,000,000) million francs,
Whoever counterfeit a trademark or registered trade mark.
(2) is punished with the sentences provided for in paragraph 1 above the one who conceals,
sells, exports, imports or uses an object from the counterfeiting of a
trademark or registered trade mark.
(3) In the cases provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 above, the jurisdiction orders
confiscation, for the benefit of the injured parts, objects from counterfeiting
of the trademark or trade mark.
(4) The jurisdiction orders the publication of his decision under the conditions
provided for in article 33 of this code.
(5) The convicted person is deposed from the right to voter, the right of eligibility and
any elective or nominative mandate to consular, trade or
industry, for a period of ten (10) years.
President of the Republic |
Lil CE section of the Cena gap has
Bankruptcy Copy Certriee Compliance ‘(

Article 334.- fraudulent debtor
(1) is punished with imprisonment of fifteen (15) days has one (01) year, everything
even non -commercial debtor, who, so as not to pay one or more of his
creditors, gives, book, transfer, strike, subtract or conceals all or part
of his property.
124
(2) In case of subtraction or concealment within two (02) months
Preceding a court decision, even non -final, the goal is presumed.
Article 332

.- Simple banking. ‘
(1) is punished with imprisonment of one (01) months to two (02) years everything
Merchant, natural person, in a state of cessation of payments, which:
a) Contracted without receiving values ​​in exchange, commitments
Deemed too important having regard to his situation when he contracted them;
b) with the intention of delaying the finding of the cessation of its
payments, shops for a resale below the course or
If, in the same intention, employs ruinous means to obtain
funds;
c) Without legitimate excuse, does not make the registry of the competent jurisdiction, the
declaration of his state of cessation of payments within the
Thirty (30) days:
d) holds incomplete or irregular accounts or does not hold it
in accordance with accounting rules and recognized uses in the
profession, having regard to the importance of the business.
(2) The trader, natural person, is also found guilty
of bankruptcy and punished with the sentences provided for in paragraph 1 ° above when,
After being declared three (03) times in a state of cessation of payments in
a period of five (05) years, these procedures have been closed for insufficiency
active. Presidency of the Republic
General YP secretariat
Service du Achier Legislatif and Rel Feats ”of

Article 333

.- Fraudulent bankruptcy copy certified as compliant /
(1) is punishable by an imprisonment of five (05) a ‘
physics which, in the event of cessation of payments:
a) has subtracted his accounts:
b) has diverted or dissipated all or part of his assets;
c) has fraudulently recognized itself with the summary of sums that it should not
not, either in his entries, or by published acts or
commitments under a private native, either in its balance sheet;
d) has exercised the commercial profession in contravention of the law;
e), after the cessation of payments, paid a creditor to the prejudice of the
mass ;
125
f} stipulated with a creditor of the particular advantages at the rate of his
vote in mass deliberations, or made with a creditor a
particular treated from which it would resolve, for the latter, an advantage to the
charge of the debtor assets from the day of the opening decision.
(2) is also punished with the sentence provided for in paragraph 1* above, everything
trader's natural person who, during a collective procedure of
preventive regulations, judicial regulations or liquidation of property, A:
a) in bad faith, presented or had an account of the results, a
assessment, a statement of receivables or debts or an active and passive state of
privileges and s gret, inaccurate or incomplete;
b) Without authorization from the president of the competent jurisdiction, accomplished a
Acts prohibited by priging-to-procedures tocallective
': Pretty! Û Epublique A
of liabilities. General secretariat #
Dear lecaslative service and work
For

Article 334

.- Corporate agents or ”
Are punishable by imprisonment of one (01) months to two (02) years, the
managers of legal persons of legal persons subject to
collective procedures, as well as permanent representatives of people
ruling morals which, in this quality and in bad faith, have:
a) used or consumed sums belonging to the legal person in
doing pure coincidence or fictitious operations;
b} shops for a resale below the course, or employee
ruinous means to obtain funds with the intention of
delay the observation of the cessation of person's payments
moral ;
c) paid or charges a creditor to the damage of the mass after the
cessation of legal person payments:
d) contracts by the legal person, on behalf of others, without
receive values ​​in exchange, commitments deemed too important
having regard to his situation, when these were contracted;
e) held, keep or let it keep an irregular or incomplete accounts of
the legal person under the conditions provided for in article 332 above
f} omitted to make the competent court registry, within the period of
Thirty days, the declaration of the state of cessation of payments of the
legal person;
g) diverted or concealed, attempted to divert or conceal a part of
their property, or have fraudulently recognized debtors of sums
that they should not, with a view to subtracting all or part of their
126
heritage to prosecution of the legal person in state of cessation of
payments or those of partners or members or creditors
of the legal person in state of cessation of payments.

Article 334-1.- Légüx representatives or in fact
Are punished with imprisonment of one (01) months to two (02) years, the
legal representatives or in fact legal persons with
members indefinitely and jointly and severally responsible for the debts of these
which, without legitimate excuse, did not do the registry of the competent jurisdiction,
the declaration of the state of cessation of payments within thirty days
or if this declaration does not include the list of solidarity partners with
indication of their names and homes.
Article 334

-2.- Managers and representatives
permanent leading legal persons.
(1) are punished with imprisonment of five (05) to ten (10) years
managers and permanent representatives of
ruling legal persons who, fraudulently:
a) subtract the books of the legal person:
b) diverted or hidden part of his assets:
c) Recognized the legal person withdraws from sums that it should not,
either in the entries, or by public acts or commitments
under private souing, either in the balance sheet;
d) exercised the profession of leader in violation of a ban provided by
OHADA uniform acts or by any legal provision or
regulatory;
e) stipulated with a creditor, in the name of the legal person, of the advantages
individuals at the rate of his vote in the deliberations of the mass or which
made, with a creditor, a particular agreement from which he
for the latter, an advantage is the responsibility of the assets of the
person from the date of cessation of payments, except
contrary provision of the law.
(2) are also punished with the sentences provided for in paragraph 1 ° above, the
above-mentioned managers who, during a settlement procedure
preventive, have:
a) In bad faith, presented or had a resutat account presented - a
Assessment, a state of receivables or debts or unreed, sfaicewtif EP Patsit
Privileges and safety, inaccurate or incomplete | In Rrrecumppft
COPE Certiree Confope
127:
b) Without authorization from the president of the competent jurisdiction, accomplished a
acts prohibited by the OHADA uniform act organizing procedures
collective liabilities.
President of the Republic
Infracti ises ‘by the ti ¢ encounters Costae Eaugaon St

Article 335.- offenses committed by third parties Certiree C ono;
Are punishable by imprisonment of five (04) in Di LL
a) People convinced to have, in the interest of the debtor, subtracted,
concealed or concealed all or part of the furniture or buildings, without
prejudice to the application of criminal provisions relating to
complicity;
b) People convinced to have fraudulently produced in the
collective procedure, either in their name, or by interposition of person
or under a false name, supposed claims;
c) people who, exercising an independent professional activity,
civil, commercial, craft or agricultural under the name of others or under
a false name, have, in bad faith, diverted, concealed, attempted to
divert or hide part of their property.
Article 335

-1.- offenses committed by the spouse, parents or
Debtor allies
Are punished with imprisonment of one (01) to three (03) years and a
fine of fifty thousand (50,000) to two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000)
francs or one of these two penalties only the spouse, the descendants,
ascendants or collaterals of the debtor or its allies until the fourth
inclusive degree which, without the knowledge of the debtor, have diverted, entertained or concealted
Effects depending on the assets of the debtor in state of cessation of payments.
Article 335-2.- Damage and Interests and Reinstatement
In the cases provided for in articles 335 and 335-1 above, then that
would have released, the court entered statue on damages and on the
reintegration, in the assets of the debtor, property, rights or actions
subtracted.
Article 335

-3.- offenses committed by the procedural trustee
collective
Is punishable by imprisonment of five (05) to ten (10) years and a fine
from two hundred thousand (200,000) to five million (5,000,000) francs, everything
legal representative of a collective procedure which:
128
a) exercises personal activity under the cover of a company in
debtor masking his actions;
b) has the credit or property of the ‘Debit as its own property;
c) dissipate the property of the debtor;
d) abuse and in bad faith, in its personal interest, either
directly, or indirectly, a deficit exploitation of the company
the debtor;
e) Buying himself on his behalf, directly or indirectly, of
property of the debtor in violation of the legislation organizing the procedures
collective liabilities.
Article 336

.- illegitimate advantages of a creditor
Is punished with imprisonment of one (01) to three (03) years and a fine
From fifty thousand (50,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) francs, the
creditor who, unless otherwise provided for in the law:
a) concludes with the debtor or with any other person, advantages
individuals at the rate of his vote in mass deliberations:
b) concludes a particular convention from which he would resolve, in his favor,
an advantage of the debtor assets from the day of the
decision to open the collective procedure.
Presidency of the Republic
General lecretamat)
CHAPTER V SURVICE OF THE CHER LEGELATIVE AND REGLEMENTA
Breakdown against the child: Ire rim éonforme i
Article 337

.- Appliance =
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of fifteen (15) days at one (01) year and
a fine of five thousand (5,000) to two hundred thousand (200,000) francs or
one of these two sorrows only, the woman who gives herself to abortion
herself or who agrees.
(2) is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years and a
fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) to two million (2,000,000) francs, the one who,
Even with her consent, gives abortion to a woman.
(3) The penalties of paragraph 2 are doubled:
a) against anyone who usually engages in
abortions;
129
b) against a person who exercises a medical profession or in
relationship with this profession.
(4) The closure of the professional premises and the prohibition to exercise the
profession may also be ordoñnées under the conditions provided for in
Articles 34 and 36 of this code.
Article 338

.- Violence on a pregnant woman
Is punishable by imprisonment of five (05) to ten (10) years and a fine
one hundred thousand (100,000) to two million (2,000,000) francs, the one who, by
violence on a pregnant woman or on the being born, causes,
Even unintentional, the death or permanent incapacity of the child.
Article 339.- Exceptions
(1) The provisions of articles 337 and 338 above are not
applicable if the facts are made by a person authorized and justified by
The need to save the mother from a serious danger for her health.
(2) In the event of pregnancy resulting from rape, medical abortion does not
constitutes not an offense if it is made after attestation of the ministry
public on the materiality of the facts.
Article 340

.- Infanticide
The mother's main or accomplice mother of the murder or assassination of her
child in the month of birth is only liable to imprisonment
from five (05) to ten (10) years, without these provisions being able to apply to
other authors or accomplices.
ARTICLE 341.- Breakdown
Is punishable by imprisonment of five (05) to ten (10) years, the one whose
actions have the consequence of depriving a child of evidence of his
filiation.
Article 342

.- Building on people
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of five (05) to ten (10) years and a
fine of ten thousand (10,000) has five hundred thousand (500,000) francs, the one who puts
In pledge a person. -
Service or dear legslath and regl has
Certiree Certified Copy |
130 A
(2) The penalties provided for in paragraph 1 above are doubled if the author is
either an ascendant, or a tutor, or a person providing custody, even
customary, the victim.
(3) is punishable by imprisonment of ten (10) years and a fine of ten
a thousand (10,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs, the one who receives a person
engaged.
(4) The jurisdiction can, moreover, pronounce the forfeiture of article 30
of this code.
Article 342

-1.- Traffic and deals with people
(1) is punished with imprisonment of ten (10) to twenty (20) years and a
fine of fifty thousand (50,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs, the one who
Likes, even occasionally, in traffic or the trafficking of people.
(2) Trafficking and trafficking of people are punishable by imprisonment of
Fifteen (15) to twenty (20) years and a fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) to ten
million (10,000,000) francs when:
a) The offense is committed with regard to a minor fifteen (15)
years ;
b) The author of the facts is a legitimate, natural or adoptive ascendant of the
victim ;
C) The author of the facts has authority over the victim or is called upon to participate, by
its functions, the fight against trafficking or peacekeeping;
DJ) The offense is committed in an organized gang or by an association of
criminals;
e) The offense is committed with the use of a weapon;
f} The victim suffered injuries as described in article 277 of the
Present code;
g) or when the victim died from acts related to these facts.
(3) The jurisdiction can, moreover, pronounce the forfeiture of article 30 of
Present code. President of the Republic =
General Secretariat
Oo. Service or legelative acmer and rules

Article 343.- Prostitution Certiree Certiree in
(1) is punishable by an imprisonment of $ I 7 S and
a fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs, all
person of one or the other sex who usually gives himself up, for
Remuneration, to sexual acts with others.
131
(2) is punishable by the same penalties who, for prostitution or
debauchery, proceeds publicly by gestures, words, writings or by all
Other means, to the secreation of people from one or the other sex.
Article 344

.- Youth corruption
(1) is punished with imprisonment of one (01) to CING (05) years and a
fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs, the one who
excites, promotes or facilitates the debauchery or corruption of a minor
twenty -one (21) years.
(2) The sorrows are doubled if the victim is less than sixteen (16)
years.
(4) The jurisdiction may also pronounce the forfeiture of article 30 of the
this code and deprive the convicted person during the same period of the authority
Parental, of all guardianship or curatorship.
Article 345.- Moral danger
Is punished with imprisonment of fifteen (15) days to six (06) months and a
fine of ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) francs, the one who, having
legal or customary guard of a child under the age of eighteen (18) years
allows you to reside in a house or establishment where the
prostitution or work there or work with a prostitute.
Article 346

.- Outraim to modesty in the presence of a minor person
sixteen
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of two (02) to five (05) years and a
fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to two hundred thousand (200,000) francs, that which
commits modesty outrage in the presence of a minor of sixteen
(16) years.
(2) The sorrows are doubled if the outrage is committed with violence or if
The author is one of the people referred to at Articuse 298 of this code.
(3) The penalty is an imprisonment of ten (10) to fifteen (15) years if
The author had sex even with the consent of the victim.
(4) In the event of rape, the imprisonment is from fifteen (15) to twenty five (25)
years. Imprisonment is for life if the author is one of the people listed
General Secretariat
Service or Richter Legislamf and Re soul
132 Copy certified co “4
__ —————
(5) In all cases, the jurisdiction may deprive the condemned authority
Parental, of any supervision or curatorship during the deadlines provided for in article 31 (4)
of this code.

Article 347.- Outrage in modesty on a minor from sixteen to
twenty -one
(1) In case the offenses referred to in articles 295, 296 and 347-1 were
committed on the person of a minor of sixteen (16) to twenty -one (21) years, the
penalties provided for said items are doubled.
(2) The jurisdiction may in all cases deprive the condemned of the authority
parental, of any supervision or curatorship during the deadlines provided for in article 31 of
Present code.
Article 347-1.- Homosexuality
Is punishable by imprisonment of six (06) months to five (05) years and a
fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to two hundred thousand (200,000) francs, all
person who has sex with a person of his sex.
Article 348

.- Drinks
(1) is punished with a fine of Cing Mille (5,000) to fifty thousand (50,000)
Francs:
a) the debitant of alcoholic beverages who receives, in his flow, a
minor sixteen (16) years not accompanied by a person
major of twenty -one (21) years by monitoring:
b) the debit of drinks that sells or offers, in its flow or in any
another public place, alcoholic beverages to a minor person
eight (18) years and not accompanied by an adult of twenty -one
(21) years by having surveillance:
c) Whoever makes a minor person drink until intoxication of twenty -one
(21) years.
(2) In the event of a recurrence, the prison sentence is fifteen (15) days
one (01) months and the fine of ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) francs.
The jurisdiction can, moreover:
a) Pronounce against the condemned debitant, the closure of his
establishment under the conditions provided for in article 34 of the meadow;
b) Order the publication of his decision: Presidency of the Republic A
Service where Achier Legislate and R CE
Copy Certifiee Confedeme
133
c) pronounce, against any condemned, the forfeiture of article 30 of the
Present code.
(3) This article is not applicable to the one who proves that it has been
misleading the age of the minor or the age or quality of the person who
accompanied him.

Article 349.- Abuse of weakness of a minor
(1) is punishable by the penalties provided for in article 318 of this code, the one who
abuse the needs, weaknesses or passions of a minor of
twenty -one (21) years to make him subscribe to any obligation, provision or
discharge or any part likely to compromise the person or fortune
of the signatory.
(2) is assimilated to the minor, for the application of this article, the person
in a state of legal prohibition or provided with a judicial council or in state
of notorious alienation.
Article 350

.- Children's violence
(1) The penalties provided for in articles 275, 277 and 278 of this code are
respectively death and imprisonment for life, if the offenses referred to in
said articles were committed on a minor of fifteen (15) years, and
penalties provided for in articles 279 (1), 280 and 281 are, in this case, doubled.
(2) The jurisdiction may pronounce the forfeiture of article 30 of this
Code for the crimes referred to in this article.
Article 351.- violence over ascendants
The sentence provided for in article 275 above is death, and those provided for in
articles 277 and 278 of this code are life imprisonment, if the
offenses referred to in said articles were committed on father and mother
legitimate, natural or adoptive or on any other legitimate ascendant of the culprit
and the penalties provided for in articles 279 (1), 280 and 281 above are
Doubled.
Article 352

.- Removal of minors
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years and a
fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to two hundred thousand (200,000) francs that which,
Without fraud or violence, removes, leads or diverts a minor person from
Eighteen (18) years against the will of those for which Loar Ale Jou
customary. Ti a
134 Certified Copy
However, this paragraph is not applicable to the one who proves that he has
been misleading on the age of the victim.
2) the subsequent marriage of the author of the facts with the victim is without
effect on prosecution and conviction.
Article 353.- Removal with fraud or violence
Is punishable by an imprisonment of CING (05) to ten (10) years and a fine
from twenty thousand (20,000) to four hundred thousand (400,000) francs, the one who, by fraud
or violence, removes, trains or diverts a minor person of twenty -one
(21) years, even if he believes her older, against those to whom
His legal or customary guard.

Article 354.- Aggravation
In cases provided for in articles 352 and 353 above:
(1) Sentence is life imprisonment:
a) If the victim is a minor person of thirteen (13) years;
b) If the culprit is to get a ransom or was done
pay.
(2) The penalty is that of death when the death of the minor victim in
results.
Article 355.- Non representation of children
Is punished with imprisonment of one (01) to five (05) years and a fine
from twenty thousand (20,000) to two hundred thousand (200,000) francs, the one who, being
responsible for the guard of a child, does not represent him to those who have the right to
claim it.
Article 355

-1.- obstacle to the exercise of the right of visit.
Is punishable by imprisonment of six (06) months to one (01) year and a
fine of fifty thousand (50,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs or
one of these two penalties only, whoever hinders the exercise, by a
parent, the right of visit granted to this
common children.
PRESDENCE Oe Ta
Service or this AMA Repus
Pchrer Eg Comra,
Copy CR. A bau
135 fe con, rme ame
Article 355-2.- Entering the right to schooling
(1) is punished with a fine of fifty thousand (50,000) to five hundred thousand
(500,000) francs, the parent who, having sufficient means, refuses to
School your child.
(2) The penalty is imprisonment of one (01) to two (02) years, in the event of
recidivism.
Article 356

.- Forced marriage
(1) is punishable by an imprisonment of CING (05) to ten (10) years and a
fine of twenty cing thousand (25,000) to one million (1,000,000) francs, the one who
forced a person to marriage.
(2) When the victim is minor of eighteen (18), the penalty
imprisonment, in the event of application of extenuating circumstances, cannot
be less than two (02) years.
(3) is punished with the sentences provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 above, the one that
gives marriage a minor girl or boy of eighteen (18) years.
(4) The jurisdiction can, moreover, deprive the condemned of parental authority,
of any guardianship or curatorship during the period provided for in article 31 (4) of the
Present code.
Article 357

.- Abusive requirement of a dowry
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months at CING (05) years and
a fine of five thousand (5,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs or
Rune of these two penalties only:
a) Whoever, by promising the marriage of a woman already married or committed
In non -broken engagement, receives a third party all or part of a
dowry;
b) The one who receives all or part of a dowry without having reimbursed everything
pretender ousted;
c) one who, without quality, receives all or part of a dowry for marriage
of a woman;
President of the Republic 7,
General secretariat ‘.
Dear legelative and reglemen/ are service
Certiree Consorme Copy \
136
ee
d) one that requires all or part of an excessive dowry during marriage
a major girl of twenty -one (21) years or a widowed woman or
divorced;
e) Whoever, by demanding an excessive dowry, hinders, for this only reason,
at the marriage of a minor girl of twenty -one (21) years;
f) the heir who receives the material advantages provided for in previous paragraphs
and promised the one he inherits.
(2) Each payment, even partial of the dowry, interrupts the prescription of
public action.

Article 358

.- Foyer abandonment
(1) is punished with a prison of three (03) months to one (01) year or a
fine of five thousand (5,000) to Cing a hundred thousand (500,000) francs, the spouse, the
father or mother who, without legitimate reason, is evaded, in
abandoning the family home or by any means, to all or part of its
moral or material obligations with regard to his spouse or his
children.
(2) If the offense is only committed to the prejudice of a spouse, the
prosecution can only be engaged on prior complaint of the spouse
abandoned.
(3) is punished with the same penalties, the customary tutor or manager who
withdrawn from the children of which he has custody, from his legal obligations or
customary.
(4) The jurisdiction may pronounce the forfeiture of article 30 of this
Code and deprive the condemned of any supervision or curatorship, during the duration
provided for in article 31 (4) of this code, and deprive it of parental authority
During the same duration with regard to one or more of his children.
(5) When the accomplice is the one who received all or part of the dowry, it is
punished with an imprisonment of three (03) months to one (01) year and a fine of
Fifty thousand (50,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs.
Presidency of the Republic
7
has
137

Article 358-1.- Expulsion of conjugal domicile
(1) is punishable by imprisonment of three (03) months to one (01) year and a
fine of fifty thousand (50,000) has five hundred thousand (500,000) francs, the husband
or the wife who, apart from any legal proceedings expelled, without reason
legitimate, his spouse of the marital home.
(2) The penalty is an imprisonment of two (02) to five (05) years:
a) The victim is a pregnant woman;
b) The expulsion is accompanied or preceded by physical violence or
morals, confiscation or destruction of personal effects of
the victim;
c) The expulsion is committed by a pers part of the
victim CS
Race where acmer legaslati and reg. Em your ne
Certiree Confo copy
Article 359

.- Bigamy
(1) is punished with imprisonment of two (02) months to two (02) years and
a fine of twenty five thousand (25,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs:
a) Polygami which contracts a monogamous marriage before dissolution
previous weddings;
b) Whoever, linked by a monogamy commitment, contracts a new
monogamous wedding or polygamous marriage, before the dissolution of
previous marriage;
c) Whoever, married according to the rules of the Civil Code, contracts a new
marriage before the dissolution of the previous one.
(2) Proof of the dissolution of the first marriage is the responsibility of the accused.
Article 360

.- Incest
(1) Regardless of the penalties provided for in articles 346 (3) and 347 (1) below
above, is punishable by imprisonment of one (01) to three (03) years and a
fine of twenty thousand (20,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs, the one who has
sex:
138
a) with its legitimate or natural ascendants or descendants, without
degree limitation;
b) with his legitimate or natural brothers or sisters, Germans, Consanguine
or uterine.
(2) Excluding the cases of notorious cohabitation or incestuous marriage, the
prosecution can only be engaged on complaints of one of the parents by blood,
Without limitation of degree. President of the Republic
Secretama gener al a
Service or Rcher Legglatis and Regulation A YT
Article 361

.- Adultery copy Certiree Compliant ”(
(1) is punishable by a month's imprisonment or
a fine of twenty cing thousand (25,000) a hundred thousand (100,000) francs, the
Married woman who has sex with a man other than her husband.
(2) is punished with the sentences provided for in paragraph 1 above, the husband who has
Sex with other women than her or her wives.
However, proof of the existence of a polygamic union is the responsibility of
husband.
(3) The prosecution can only be engaged on complaints of the offended spouse.
(4) connivance or forgiveness of the offended spouse prevents or stops
any pursuit.
(5) The offended spouse can stop the effect of pronounced condemnation
against the other spouse, by agreeing to continue or regain life
common.
Title IV
Contraventions
Articles 362 to 370.- The provisions of articles 362 to 370 defining the
contraventions are set by regulation.
Title V
Transitional and finishing arrangements
Article 371

.- (1) This law abrogates all previous provisions
opposites with the same object.
(2) However, the crimes, crimes or tickets committed and/or
prosecuted previously at the entry into force of this law remain
139
governed by the provisions of laws n ° 65/LF/24 of November 12, 1965 and
N ° 67/LF/1 of June 12, 1967, until the intervention of judicial decisions
definitive relative.
Article 372.- This law will be registered, then published in the newspaper
Official in French and English./- ’
Yaoundé, 47 II 2016
Presiders-Qe the Republic,
: RTE KO BIYA
140